In the latter part of April, incoming data suggested that M-1B, after adjustment for the estimated effects of shifts into NOW accounts, was growing at a rate well above the short-run objectives set forth by the Committee. Consequently, required reserves increased more than the supply of reserves being made available through open market operations. Banks adjusted to the constrained availability of reserves by reducing excess reserves and by increasing borrowings from the Federal Reserve. In the two statement weeks ending May 6, member bank borrowings averaged about $2.4 billion, compared with an average of about $1 billion in the first three statement weeks after the meeting on March 31; and the federal funds rate, which had averaged around 15V6 percent in the first three weeks of April, fluctuated within a range of 17 to 20 percent in the last days of April and the first days of May. On May 4 the Board of Governors announced an increase from 13 to 14 percent in Federal Reserve basic discount rates and an increase from 3 to 4 percentage points in the surcharge on frequent borrowings of large institutions.

In a telephone conference on May 6, the Committee agreed that in the brief period before the next regular meeting scheduled for May 18, the reserve path would continue to be set on the basis of the short-run objectives for monetary growth established on March 31. It was recognized that for a time monetary growth might be high in relation to those objectives and that the federal funds rate might continue to exceed the upper end of the range indicated for consultation. In the period remaining until this meeting, bank reserve positions remained under pressure, and federal funds typically traded between 18 and 19 percent.

Growth in M-1B, adjusted for the estimated effects of shifts into NOW accounts, accelerated sharply in April to an annual rate of about 14 percent. But adjusted M-1B had grown from the fourth quarter of 1980 to the first quarter of 1981 at an annual rate of only 1 percent, and its level in April was well within the Committee’s longer-run range for that aggregate. M-2 had continued to grow rapidly in April, and its level continued above the upper end of its longer-run range. Growth in the nontransaction component of M-2 slowed markedly, however, as the total of savings and small-denomination time deposits was about unchanged and inflows into money market mutual funds slowed.

Total credit outstanding at U.S. commercial banks registered a slight decline in March and grew at an annual rate of about 4V6 percent in April. Holdings of investments changed little over the two months, and growth in loans, particularly business loans, was quite weak. Net issues of commercial paper by nonfinancial corporations declined in April, following expansion at a rapid pace in the first quarter. Issuance of publicly offered bonds remained heavy during April, and the volume of new equity offerings rose considerably.

Short-term market interest rates had risen substantially over the period since the Committee’s meeting on March 31: yields on Treasury bills moved up 23A to 4 percentage points while yields on private short-term market instruments increased 4V6 to 5V4 percentage points. Most long-term interest rates rose to record levels and on balance advanced about 1 percentage point. Over the intermeeting interval, the prime rate charged by commercial banks on short-term business loans was raised in steps from 17V6 percent to \9lA percent. In home mortgage markets, average rates on new commitments for fixed-rate loans at savings and loan associations rose above 16 percent, from 15.40 percent at the end of March.

The staff projections presented at this meeting suggested that the surge in growth of real GNP in the first quarter would be followed by much slower growth over the rest of 1981. The rise in the fixed-weight price index for gross domestic business product was projected to moderate as the year progressed but nevertheless to remain rapid.

In the Committee’s discussion of the economic situation and outlook, members commented on the considerably greater strength in activity in the first quarter than had been expected, and they continued to stress the difficulties of economic forecasting currently and the importance of adhering to longer-term objectives. While generally anticipating a substantial slowing of growth from the exceptionally rapid pace now indicated for the first quarter, a number of members expressed the view that expansion in activity over the rest of the year was likely to continue to exceed the rates typically being forecast. The observation was made that weakness in demands and activity appeared to be confined to a few sectors, albeit such major ones as housing and automobiles, and that the risks of a significant decline in overall activity appeared to be tempered by the prospect that some accumulated backlogs of demands would be activated whenever interest rates declined. It was also suggested, on the other hand, that high and volatile interest rates could begin to have a cumulative effect in dampening activity, and that little was known about the effects of financial stress that might be developing.

At its meeting on February 2-3, the Committee had adopted the following ranges for growth of the monetary aggregates over the period from the fourth quarter of 1980 to the fourth quarter of 1981: M-1A and M-1B, 3 to b¥z percent and 3V6 to 6 percent respectively, after adjustment for the estimated effects of flows into NOW accounts; M-2, 6 to 9 percent; and M-3, 6V2 to 9V2 percent. It was understood that the distorting effects of shifts into NOW accounts would change during the year and that other short-run factors might cause considerable variation in annual rates of growth from one month to the next and from one quarter to the next.

In the Committee’s discussion of policy for the period immediately ahead, it was emphasized that on March 31 the Committee had established an objective for growth of M-1B (adjusted for the estimated effects of shifts into NOW accounts) over the three months from March to June at an annual rate of SV2 percent or somewhat less, and that growth in April had greatly exceeded that pace. According to a staff analysis, some retardation of M-1B growth over the remaining two months of the quarter was to be expected, in light of the greater pressure on bank reserve positions that had developed recently and the apparent slowing of growth in nominal GNP in the current quarter. But growth of M-1B over the two-month period would have to be negligible if the specifications adopted on March 31 were to be realized.

The staff analysis also suggested that growth of M-2 would be less rapid over the second quarter than had been anticipated earlier, reflecting a slowing of growth in savings deposits and small-denomination time deposits as well as continued weakness in money market mutual funds. Thus, growth of the broader monetary aggregates might begin to move down toward their target ranges for growth over the year from the fourth quarter of 1980 to the fourth quarter of 1981.

In considering objectives for monetary growth over the remainder of the quarter, the members in general agreed that a posture of restraint needed to be maintained. They generally agreed with the view that it was particularly important to reduce growth of the monetary aggregates rather quickly, and initial differences in views concerning the precise specifications for monetary growth were relatively narrow. In the discussion, a number of points were emphasized. The indications of continuing strength in economic activity combined with the recent exceptional rise in the income velocity of money posed the risk of pressure for excessive expansion in money and credit as the year developed. Growth of the broader monetary aggregates was already somewhat high relative to the Committee’s ranges for the year. The indications of some slowing of the rise in the consumer price index did not appear to reflect as yet any clear relaxation of underlying inflationary pressures, and emphasis was placed on the importance of conveying a clear sense of restraint at a critical time with respect to inflation and inflationary expectations.

With respect to the federal funds rate, it was again stressed that the specification of an intermeeting range for fluctuations over a period of time provided a mechanism for initiating timely consultations between regularly scheduled meetings when it appeared that fluctuations within the specific range were proving to be inconsistent with the objectives for the behavior of the reserve and monetary aggregates. The ranges proposed for the period ahead typically were from 16 or 17 percent to 21 or 22 percent.

At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee decided to seek behavior of reserve aggregates associated with growth of M-1B from April to June at an annual rate of 3 percent or lower, after allowance for the impact of flows into NOW accounts, and growth in M-2 at an annual rate of about 6 percent. A shortfall in growth of M-1B from the two-month rate of 3 percent would be acceptable, in light of the rapid growth in April and the objective adopted by the Committee on March 31 for growth from March to June at an annual rate of 5V£ percent or somewhat less. The members recognized that shifts into NOW accounts would continue to distort measured growth in M-1B to an unpredictable extent and that operational paths would have to be developed in the light of evaluation of those distortions. The Chairman might call for Committee consultation if it appeared to the Manager for Domestic Operations that pursuit of the monetary objectives and related reserve paths during the period before the next meeting was likely to be associated with a federal funds rate persistently outside a range of 16 to 22 percent.

The following domestic policy directive was issued to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York:

The information reviewed at this meeting suggests that real GNP will grow much less rapidly in the current quarter, following the substantial expansion in the first

quarter; prices on the average have continued to rise rapidly, although somewhat less so most recently than earlier in the year. The dollar value of total retail sales increased slightly further in March, but it declined appreciably in April when sales of new cars fell in response to the ending of price concessions. Industrial production rose moderately in both months, while nonfarm payroll employment changed little, after adjustment for strikes, and the unemployment rate was stable at 7.3 percent. In March housing starts remained at a reduced pace. Over the first four months of 1981, the rise in the index of average hourly earnings was slightly less rapid than during 1980.

The weighted average value of the dollar against major foreign currencies has risen steadily since the end of March to its highest level in three and a half years. The U.S. trade deficit declined sharply in March, bringing the first-quarter deficit to a level well under the 1980 average.

Growth in M-1B, adjusted for the estimated effects of shifts into NOW accounts, accelerated sharply in April and growth in M-2 remained rapid. Since March, both short-term and long-term market interest rates have risen substantially. On May 4 the Board of Governors announced an increase in Federal Reserve discount rates from 13 to 14 percent and an increase in the surcharge from 3 to 4 percentage points on frequent borrowings of large institutions.

The Federal Open Market Committee seeks to foster monetary and financial conditions that will help to reduce inflation, promote economic growth, and contribute to a sustainable pattern of international transactions. At its meeting in early February, the Committee agreed that these objectives would be furthered by growth of M-1A, M-1B, M-2, and M-3 from the fourth quarter of 1980 to the fourth quarter of 1981 within ranges of 3 to 5Vfe percent, 3V& to 6 percent, 6 to 9 percent, and 6V2 to 9V2 percent respectively, abstracting from the impact of introduction of NOW accounts on a nationwide basis. The associated range for bank credit was 6 to 9 percent. These ranges will be reconsidered as conditions warrant.

In the short run the Committee seeks behavior of reserve aggregates consistent with a substantial deceleration of growth in M-1B from April to June to an annual rate of 3 percent or lower, after allowance for the impact of flows into NOW accounts, and with growth in M-2 at an annual rate of about 6 percent. The shortfall in growth of M-1B from the two-month rate specified above would be acceptable, in light of the rapid growth in April and the objective adopted by the Committee on March 31 for growth from March to June at an annual rate of 5V& percent or somewhat less. It is recognized that shifts into NOW accounts will continue to distort measured growth in M-1B to an unpredictable extent, and operational reserve paths will be developed in the light of evaluation of those distortions. The Chairman may call for Committee consultation if it appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations that pursuit of the monetary objectives and related reserve paths during the period before the next meeting is likely to be associated with a federal funds rate persistently outside a range of 16 to 22 percent.

Votes for this action: Messrs. Volcker, Solomon, Boehne, Boykin, Corrigan,

Gramley, Partee, Rice, Schultz, Mrs. Teeters, Messrs. Wallich, and Winn.

Votes against this action: None. (Mr. Winn voted as an alternate member.)





REFERENCE NOTES


The central source material for this book is drawn from thirty-four interviews with governors of the Federal Reserve Board—Chairman Paul A. Volcker, Vice Chairman Frederick H. Schultz, Henry C.Wallich, Lyle E. Gramley, Nancy H. Teeters, J. Charles Partee, Philip E. Coldwell, Emmett J. Rice, Vice Chairman Preston Martin and Martha R. Seger—and four presidents of Federal Reserve Banks—Anthony M. Solomon of New York, Lawrence K. Roos of St. Louis, Frank E. Morris of Boston and E. Gerald Corrigan of Minneapolis and New York. Other important interviews included, from the Carter Administration, Stuart E. Eizenstat, director of the Domestic Policy Staff; Charles L. Schultze, chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers; and Treasury Secretary G. William Miller; and from the Reagan Administration, David A. Stockman, director of the Office of Management and Budget; Lawrence A. Kudlow, assistant director of the OMB for economic analysis; William A. Niskanen and William Poole of the CEA; Treasury Secretary James A. Baker III; Deputy Treasury Secretary Richard G. Darman; William M. Isaac, Chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation; and Treasury assistant secretaries, Paul Craig Roberts and Manuel H. Johnson. Scores of additional interviews were conducted with officials from finance and banking, Congress, the Federal Reserve System and ordinary private citizens from across the United States. Unless otherwise cited in the Notes, statements by individuals are all derived from these personal interviews.

The principal sources for the economic data in the book are the annual reports of the Board of Governors and the Annual Statistical Digest published by the Federal Reserve System, as well as the Economic Report of the President, prepared each year by the Council of Economic Advisers. Unless otherwise cited in the Notes, the data on monetary policy, financial markets and economic performance are all drawn from these volumes.

chapter 1: The Choice of Wall Street

1. The President’s speech, New York Times, July 16, 1979. The New York Times/CBS News poll was conducted a day after the speech. The political consultant quoted was Peter Hart.

2. The observations of Eugene Sussman and the others, as well as Jay Schmie-deskamp’s analysis, are from “The Buying Binge,” by William Greider, Washington Post, December 17, 1978. The Gallup poll, conducted January 19-22, 1979, found that 27 percent thought a recession was “very likely” in the next twelve months and 35 percent thought it was “fairly likely.” The shortened time horizon that inflation caused in public attitudes has been described by Patrick Caddell, public-opinion adviser to President Carter, among others.

3. Market reactions and Cabinet resignations, New York Times and Wall Street Journal, July 17-20, 1979. The Federal Reserve’s senior economists drew the same conclusion about political reactions driving down the dollar. In its confidential economic analysis submitted to the Fed’s governors, the staff reported: “. . . the cancellation of a scheduled energy message by the President followed by news reports that the Administration did not plan to decontrol domestic oil prices, triggered further selling pressure on the dollar in early July. Downward pressure on the dollar intensified in mid-July when the announcement of Cabinet resignations heightened uncertainty over U.S. economic policies.” “Current Economic and Financial Conditions,” Federal Reserve Board Staff, August 8, 1979.

4. The samples of market talk are from The Wall Street Journal, May 20, 1983, and May 25, 1984, and the Washington Post, May 31, 1984. Perhaps the harshest examples of the “wise guy” tone of Wall Street insiders can be found in Barron s, the financial weekly; the most sophisticated and droll, in the books by the pseudonymous “Adam Smith.”

5. The statistics on bank deposits are for 1979, from The American Banker s annual listing, “The Hundred Largest Banks in the U.S.,” February 29, 1980. The particular deposit totals change from year to year, but only rarely does that alter rankings at the very top. The other four New York banks above $10 billion were Chemical ($29 billion), Bankers Trust ($22 billion), Marine Midland ($12.5 billion) and Irving Trust ($12 billion). The other California banks: Security Pacific National of Los Angeles ($18.5 billion), Wells Fargo ($16 billion) and Crocker National ($12.5 billion) in San Francisco, and United California ($11.7 billion) in Los Angeles. The two Chicago banks were Continental Illinois ($24 billion) and First National ($21 billion). Pittsburgh’s was the Mellon Bank ($10 billion). The Texas banks were Republic ($6 billion) and First National ($6 billion) in Dallas, First City National ($5 billion) and Texas Commerce ($4 billion) in Houston.

6. The details on Merrill Lynch and Salomon Brothers are from the firms’ annual reports. Statistics on concentration in capital markets in 1979 are from Securities Data Company of New York. The other five brokerages in the top ten were Blyth Eastman Dillon; Lehman Brothers Kuhn Loeb; Kidder, Peabody; Dillon Read; and Prudential-Bache Securities.

7. The world rankings of bank size are from “The 500 Largest Banks in the World,” The American Banker, February 29, 1980. The annual listings roughly describe how international financial power is changing. By 1983, Japan had eight of the top twenty banks in the world, compared to five in 1979.

8. The nine banks commonly referred to as money-center banks were, in 1979, Chase Manhattan, Bankers Trust, Manufacturers Hanover, Chemical, Citibank,

Morgan Guaranty, First National of Chicago, Bank of America and Security Pacific. Occasionally, the Federal Reserve and others used a broader definition that encompassed sixteen banks, including First National of Boston, Marine Midland, Irving Trust, Mellon, Continental Illinois, Crocker National and Wells Fargo. When Continental Illinois collapsed in 1984, it was replaced on the list by First Interstate of California.

9. The total of 405,830 finance professionals was counted in 1981, compared to 300,680 in 1976. Together, these people handled 72 percent of the dollar volume on the New York Stock Exchange. “Basis for Strategy: A New Census of the Corporate Finance Universe,” Dow Jones & Company, 1982.

10. See Marcia Stigum, The Money Market, Dow Jones-Irwin, 1983, for the professional’s guide to the money market’s various financial instruments and how they react to Federal Reserve policy.

11. The approximate sizes of the three main financial markets were derived from the 1979 flow-of-funds accounts compiled by the Federal Reserve. Annual Statistical Digest, 1970-1979, Federal Reserve Board.

12. An excellent primer on the Federal Reserve’s operations and its relationship to financial markets was published by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, written by Paul Meek, a senior vice president at the bank, and entitled U.S. Monetary Policy and Financial Markets, 1982.

13. See William C. Melton, Inside the Fed: Making Monetary Policy, Dow Jones-Irwin, 1985, for the complexities of “Fed watching,” as well as a thorough guide to the major technical issues of monetary policy in recent years.

14. Richard Moe provided a sampling of the confidential comments on Paul Volcker and a general description of the sources, but not their names.

15. Paine Webber’s marketing strategy, interview, John Lampe, vice president, director of advertising and public relations, November 20, 1984. Bob Simon’s comments on Sears, Advertising Age, February 13, 1984.

16. “Active Investors: A Survey Concerning Investments and Brokerage Firms,” Dow Jones & Company, 1981. “The Wall Street Journal Subscriber Study,” Dow Jones, 1982.

17. The data on financial assets held by families and the distribution of this wealth are from “Survey of Consumer Finances, 1983,” prepared by Robert B. Avery, Gregory E. Elliehausen and Glenn B. Canner of the Federal Reserve Board’s Division of Research and Statistics and Thomas A. Gustafson of the Department of Health and Human Services. It was published in two reports, Federal Reserve Bulletin, September and December, 1984. The total net financial worth of all households was derived from the Federal Reserve’s flow-of-funds accounts for 1979, excluding life-insurance and pension-fund savings since those were not regarded as financial assets in the Federal Reserve study. Annual Statistical Digest, 1970-1979, Federal Reserve Board.

18. The approximate proportions of financial assets held directly by households and by various institutions were derived from the 1979 flow-of-funds accounts. The wealth held by tax-exempt foundations and university endowments was derived from “1985 Prospects for Financial Markets,” Salomon Brothers, 1984.

19. The stock market and inflation. The index of consumer prices was at 107 in 1969 and reached 212 in 1979. Economic Report of the President, 1982.

20. Maxwell Newton discusses the negative real interest rates and the anger of investors in his book The Fed: Inside the Federal Reserve, the Secret Power Center That Controls the American Economy, Times Books, 1983.

21. Minarik’s conclusions on inflation’s impact are from “The Distributional Effects of Inflation and Their Implications,” in Stagflation: The Causes, Effects and Solutions, Joint Economic Committee, U.S. Congress, 1980. See also Minarik’s “The Size Distribution of Income During Inflation,” Review of Income and Wealth, December 1979. Edward N. Wolff s research is from “The Distributional Effects of the 1969-75 Inflation on Holdings of Household Wealth in the United States,” Review of Income and Wealth, June 1979. Other studies on inflation in Britain and Canada have found the same distributional effects.

22. Financial numbers and the anonymous Administration official’s remark are from The New York Times and The Wall Street Journal, July 23 and 24, 1979.

23. In his own memoirs, Jimmy Carter makes no mention of the Volcker appointment. See Keeping Faith: Memoirs of a President, Bantam, 1982.

24. Lance’s warning. Gerald Rafshoon, interview, October 24, 1984. In a separate interview, Bert Lance said he has no recollection of this conversation.

25. The financial markets’ reactions to the Volcker appointment are from The New York Times and The Wall Street Journal, July 26, 1979.

chapter 2: In the Temple

1. “The Federal Reserve Building,” Board of Governors, 1937.

2. The District of Columbia’s attempt to collect property taxes from the Federal Reserve Board is from an unpublished study on Fed independence done for the Board of Governors, “The Status of the Federal Reserve System in the Federal Government,” by Howard H. Hackley, 1972.

3. Wright Patman’s critique of the Fed was summarized in A Primer on Money, which he wrote as chairman of the Subcommittee on Domestic Finance, published by the House Banking Committee in 1964. His remarks on bankers are from his speech “The ABC’s of America’s Money System,” Congressional Record, August 3, 1964.

4. The citizen testimony against Volcker was by Kenneth White, president of the Virginia Taxpayers Association, Senate Banking Committee, July 30, 1979.

5. Wickliffe B. Vennard, Sr., The Federal Reserve Hoax, privately published, circa 1962. An excellent sampling of anti-Fed polemics is collected at the Federal Reserve Board library.

6. Wall Street Journal editorial, June 4, 1984.

7. The “monks” label was used by Representative Fernand St. Germain (D-R.I.), who became House Banking chairman in 1983.

8. Quoted in Wickliffe B. Vennard, Sr., The Federal Reserve Hoax (see above).

9. John Kenneth Galbraith, Money: Whence It Came, Where It Went, Houghton Mifflin, 1975.

10. The money aggregates and reserves for August 1979 are from the FRB’s Annual Statistical Digest, 1970-1979, and are not seasonally adjusted. Federal Reserve analysts make seasonal adjustments in aggregate totals and monetary growth rates as more historical data become available, many months and sometimes years later. In general, I have used the unadjusted statistics whenever possible because they were the data available to Federal Reserve officials at the time they made policy decisions.

11. Eurodollars. Jeffrey Nichols of Argus Research Corporation said the Euromarket “can be considered analytically as a 51st state outside the Federal Reserve System—and not subject to its reserve requirements—but still an integral part of the nation’s financial system”; quoted in Michael Moffitt, The World's

Money: International Banking from Bretton Woods to the Brink of Insolvency, Simon and Schuster, 1983. The estimate of Eurodollar deposits held by Americans is from Purposes & Functions, Federal Reserve Board, 1983. Volcker’s pithy remarks on the global dollar are from speeches, October 24, 1978, and October 9, 1979.

12. Bank failures are from the Annual Report, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, 1979. Business failures are from “Business Failure Record,” Dun & Bradstreet Corporation, 1981.

13. The description of internal staff attitudes at the Federal Reserve, the comments on Miller and Burns, and the expectations for Paul Volcker were derived from a series of background interviews with staff members. Merritt Sherman, a retired economist, was particularly helpful in elaborating the history of the institution. Sherman joined the research department of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco in 1926, twelve years after the Fed began operations, and worked in the System for half a century, eventually as secretary to the Board of Governors.

14. Volcker speech at Harvard commencement, June 6, 1985.

15. Statistics on Fed employees, “Budgetary Status of the Federal Reserve System,” Congressional Budget Office, 1983.

chapter 3: A Pact with the Devil

1. Volcker on inflation, House Budget Committee, September 5, 1979, and New York Times, August 8, 1979.

2. Staff forecast of recession, “Summary and Outlook,” Federal Reserve Board Staff, September 12, 1979. The confidential staff reports prepared for meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee are kept confidential for five years, then made available only on request. The contents are quite conventional economic reporting and analysis, divided into three categories: the report known as the “green book” covers international financial conditions including especially dollar exchange rates, the “red book” consists of regional economic conditions reported by the twelve Reserve Banks, and the “blue book” covers proposed options for monetary policy. Given the routine content of these reports, there is no reasonable explanation why they are kept secret so long, other than to protect the Federal Reserve from critical scrutiny and embarrassment. If the outsiders could read these reports six months after they were prepared, the staff s errors and miscalculations would become much more obvious to the public.

3. Lyle E. Gramley, Wall Street Journal, August 27, 1979.

4. Market conditions and policy options are from the “blue book,” formally entitled “Monetary Aggregates and Money Market Conditions,” Federal Reserve Board Staff, September 14, 1979.

5. Minutes, Federal Open Market Committee and Board of Governors, September 18, 1979.

6. Wall Street Journal, September 20, 1979.

7. Jack Brod, interview, September 28, 1984.

8. Arthur Bowker, interview, September 24, 1984.

9. Jim Clark, Sandy Shields and Roger Kerndt, interviews, April 4, 1985.

10. National housing prices, Los Angeles Times, August 16, 1979.

11. Herbert Young, interview, September 27, 1984.

12. Irvine Ranch, Business Week, May 2, 1977.

13. David Parry, interview, October 22, 1984.

14. Bank lending and corporate debt, Annual Statistical Digest, 1970-1979, Federal Reserve Board.

15. Samuelson’s comment is from “The Radical Economics of Milton Friedman,” by John Davenport, Fortune, June 1, 1967. Business Week called Friedman a “genuine radical” and The New York Times described him as an “intellectual radical.”

16. Milton Friedman and Anna Jacobson Schwartz, A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-1960, Princeton University Press, 1963.

17. Unemployment and inflation in the 1960s, Economic Report of the President, 1982.

18. Data on the 1974-1975 recession, Encyclopedia of Economics, McGraw-Hill, 1982.

19. A complete set of the semiannual reports of the Shadow Open Market Committee was provided by Professor Karl Brunner of the University of Rochester.

20. The Humphrey-Hawkins legislation of 1978 put into law instructions to the Federal Reserve that had originally been adopted by congressional resolution in 1975.

21. Federal debt as a percentage of GNP, Statistical Abstract of the United States, Bureau of the Census, 1983.

22. Volcker on “the long run has caught up with us,” speech to the American Bankers Association, October 9, 1979.

23. My brief description of how the management strategies of commercial banks evolved into a more aggressive competition is a capsule summary of a rich and complex story. The development is traced in fascinating detail in two books by Martin Mayer, The Bankers, Random House, 1974, and The Money Bazaars, E. P. Dutton, 1984. The international implications are lucidly explained by Michael Moffitt, The World's Money, Simon and Schuster, 1983.

24. Federal Advisory Council minutes were provided at my request by the

Federal Reserve Board, covering the years 1979-1984. To my knowledge, this is only the second time these reports have been made public by the Federal Reserve. In my research, I found only one other instance where the contents of FAC meetings were revealed. John T. Woolley, a political scientist at Washington University, obtained the FAC minutes for 1968-1972, described in Monetary Politics: The Federal Reserve and the Politics of Monetary Policy, Cambridge University Press, 1984. .

25. Nixon’s regrets. Cited in Gregory Fossedal, “The Unaccountable Mystique of Paul Volcker,” American Spectator, December 1984.

chapter 4: Behavior Modification

1. Albert M. Wojnilower, “The Central Role of Credit Crunches in Recent Financial History,” Brookings Economic Papers, 2:1980, Brookings Institution.

2. Market reactions are from The Wall Street Journal, October 9 and 10, 1979, and “Report of Open Market Desk Operations, September 18 to November 14, 1979,” Federal Reserve Board.

3. Details on how dealers profit from their transactions with the Fed’s Open Market Desk are from an interview with Irving Auerbach of Aubrey G. Lanston & Company, December 8, 1983. During the interview, the news arrived that the Fed had executed a $1 billion injection of reserves; Auerbach had predicted $900 million. “I was only $100 million off and in our business that’s nothing,” he said.

The complaint that the Federal Reserve needlessly “churns” its open-market account has been raised by a number of monetarist economists, most persuasively by William Poole of Brown University.

4. William C. Melton’s recollections are from his book Inside the Fed: Making Monetary Policy, Dow Jones-Irwin, 1985, which provides, among other things, a splendid description of the uncertainties that Fed watchers face daily in the Fed Funds market.

5. Volcker’s comments are from his speech to the American Bankers Association, October 9, 1979, and the MacNeillLehrer Report, October 10, 1979.

6. Allan Meltzer’s reaction is from “Can Volcker Stand Up to Inflation?,” by Nicholas von Hoffman, New York Times Magazine, December 2, 1979. Other market reactions are from The Wall Street Journal, November 15 and December

18, 1979.

7. Interviews and other sources for reactions to October 6 decision are: William Kline, October 2, 1984; James Woulfe, October 3, 1984; Richard LeCates, November 30, 1984; Marvin Berger, May 6, 1985; Jimmy Jackson, October 9, 1984; Vivan Jennings, June 22, 1985; Neal Conover, April 3, 1985; Chemical Bank credit limits, Wall Street Journal, December 18, 1979; Portland Teachers Credit Union and Virginia State Employees Credit Union, Joint Economic Committee, November 5, 1979. Illinois usury limit, Chicago Federal Reserve Bank report, November 14, 1979; Suffolk County Federal Savings & Loan, background interview, October 10, 1984; Lina Gray, Department of Labor Federal Credit Union, interview, October 3, 1984; condition of thrifts, John Tuccillo, research director, National Council of Savings Institutions, interview, October 4, 1984; Merrill Lynch Ready Assets, William Hewitt, vice president, interview, October

19, 1984, and Federal Reserve Board flow of funds for 1979-1980; and “Report on Economic Conditions,” Federal Open Market Committee, November 14, 1979.

8. The “demand side” influence of monetary policy, Annual Report, 1981, Federal Reserve Board.

9. Girard Bank and Bank of America comments, Wall Street Journal, October 19, 1979.

10. Bank loan commitments, Albert M. Wojnilower, “The Central Role of Credit Crunches in Recent Financial History,” Brookings Institution.

11. The favoritism in bank lending during periods of scarce credit and the new controls that would restore equity were described by Governor Andrew F. Brimmer in “Multi-National Banks and the Management of Monetary Policy in the United States,” American Economics Association, December 28, 1972. Similar reforms were proposed unsuccessfully in the early 1980s by Representative Henry Reuss, among others.

12. Morgan Guaranty’s estimate of Eurodollar market is from Michael Moffitt, The World's Money, Simon and Schuster, 1983.

13. Wallich on Eurodollar leakage, speech, October 11, 1979.

14. World Financial Markets, Morgan Guaranty Trust Company, October 1979.

15. Wall Street Journal on banks’ speculative lending, December 18, 1979.

16. The true dimensions of bank lending to the Hunts’ silver speculation were not known until long after the collapse, assembled in investigative hearings by the House Subcommittee on Government Operations and reports submitted to the committee by the Federal Reserve and the Securities and Exchange Commission. “Silver Prices and the Adequacy of Federal Action in the Marketplace, 1979-80,” March 31 to May 22, 1980.

17. Federal Advisory Council minutes, November 1, 1979.

18. Volcker’s lament was before the Senate Banking Committee, February 19, 1980.

19. Senators Byrd and Proxmire, Congressional Record, October 19, 24 and 25, 1979.

20. Congressional complaints about the Fed’s money error, House Banking Committee, October 29, 1979.

Throughout the weeks after October 6, Paul Volcker generally avoided making any public predictions of recession. He acknowledged that “a period of adjustment” might be required and agreed with questioners that the economy could contract. Despite this caution, the chairman still found himself in controversy over remarks he made before the Joint Economic Committee on October 17, 1979, where he supposedly predicted a “lower standard of living” for Americans.

What Volcker actually said was a simple statement of self-evident economics, an observation that no economist would dispute:

I would point out that productivity growth in this country is actually negative in a recent period, and we have had higher oil prices. And, of course, we import 50 percent of our oil, so that the higher revenues going abroad do not go to American citizens. Under those conditions, the standard of living of the average American has to decline. I don’t think we can escape that when we’re producing less with the same amount of effort, according to the statistics, and we’re paying high prices abroad.

Some press accounts suggested that Volcker was proposing a lower standard of living, and many politicians, including the President, were compelled to state publicly that they disagreed with the Federal Reserve chairman. Volcker himself spent much time clarifying his remarks. In fact, Volcker had said precisely the same thing about productivity and living standards two days earlier before the Senate Banking Committee, but none of the reporters at that hearing found his comments newsworthy.

21. Carter press conference on October 9, the San Diego speech on October 11 and the television interview, October 25, are from Presidential Documents, 1979.

22. Federal Advisory Council, November 1, 1979.

chapter 5: The Liberal Apology

1. Details on the deregulation legislation in the concluding congressional debates are from the Congressional Record, March 26 and 27, 1980, and the conference report dated March 21. House and Senate passed earlier, different bills in 1979 which were combined in conference to form the final measure.

2. Volcker’s warnings on the membership problem were taken from an April 2, 1979, speech and testimony before the Senate Banking Committee, February 4, 1980.

3. Kenneth A. Guenther, interviews, September 14, 1983; October 27, 1983; and July 9, 1985.

4. Representative Henry Reuss, interview, August 26, 1983.

5. Daniel Brill, interview, June 29, 1984.

6. The tax implications of the new mandatory reserves were derived from “Federal Reserve Staff Memorandum on Five-Year Cost Projections for Monetary Improvement Legislation,” Congressional Record, March 27, 1980.

7. Data on the financial industry’s donations to 1980 congressional campaigns were compiled by Common Cause, based on filings at the Federal Election Commission. The banking interests of senators and representatives were revealed in their disclosure statements for 1980, as reported by Congressional Quarterly, September 5, 1981.

8. Proxmire remark on the risks of failure, “Big Bank Battle,” by Richard A. Rossi, Duns Review, March 1980.

9. Kenneth McLean, interview, July 9, 1985.

10. Reuss remark on the risks of failure, “Big Bank Battle,” by Richard A. Rossi (see above).

11. Albert Wojnilower’s observation on “freeing” the thrifts is from his “The Central Role of Credit Crunches in Recent Financial History,” Brookings Institution.

12. Proxmire’s argument is from debate when the Senate first passed the deregulation bill, Congressional Record, October 31, 1979. The Senate Banking Committee’s report was issued October 15, 1979.

13. Senator Morgan’s critique was based on an analysis of winners and losers in deregulation by Henry B. Schecter, economist and urban affairs director of the AFL-CIO, found in the Congressional Record, October 31, 1979. Data were from the 1977 Survey of Consumer Credit, Survey Research Center, University of Michigan.

14. Inflation does inflict unconscionable losses on people of modest means, particularly among the retired, who depend on savings to maintain their living standards. A direct solution to this injustice would be provided if the government issued inflation-indexed savings notes or bonds in modest denominations. The “small savers” could be held harmless against inflation. They would receive a much lower interest return but it would be real interest. The government would guarantee to make up any losses due to inflation. Such notes or bonds might be available up to a personal limit of $100,000 or $200,000 so that any citizen could store a generous portion of wealth in absolute safety.

15. The median balance for family checking accounts was $500, thus half of the families had less, as reported in “Survey of Consumers Finance, 1983,” Federal Reserve Bulletin, December 1984.

16. Wojnilower described how deregulation produced higher interests in a conference speech at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, October 30, 1981.

17. Edsall’s book describes a variety of electoral pressures developing in the 1970s, including the rising volume of campaign contributions from business interests, that drove the Democratic Party toward a more conservative agenda. Thomas B. Edsall, The New Politics of Inequality, W. W. Norton, 1984. The declining burden of corporate taxation is from “Inequity & Decline,” by Robert

S. McIntyre and Dean C. Tipps, Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, 1983.

18. Usury. Jacques Le Goff, “The Usurer and Purgatory,” in The Dawn of Modern Banking, Yale University Press, 1979.

19. The French usurer of 1540 is from Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie, The Peasants of Languedoc, University of Illinois Press, 1974.

20. John Maynard Keynes’s vision, from “Economic Possibilities for Our Grandchildren,” Essays in Persuasion, Harcourt Brace, 1932, and The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money, Harcourt Brace & World, 1965.

21. Details on Islamic banking were taken from Traute Wohlers-Scharf, Arab and Islamic Banks, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, 1983; Roger Cooper, “A Calculator in One Hand and the Koran in the Other,” Euromoney, November 1981; and Abraham L. Udovitch, “Bankers without Banks: Commerce, Banking and Society in the Islamic World of the Middle Ages,” in The Dawn of Modern Banking, Yale University Press, 1979.

22. Examples of post-1980 legal usury are from the Washington Post, July 31, 1984, and The Wall Street Journal, April 8, 1985.

23. Albert Wojnilower’s argument on the benefits of interest-rate controls, outlined in his papers previously cited in this chapter, is actually stronger than my description in the text. Wojnilower contends that higher interest rates have little restraining effect and that monetary policy has always relied on supply cutoffs—“credit crunches”—in order to force a slowdown in lending and economic activity. Advocates of deregulation are apt to point out that Wojnilower is not a disinterested witness, since his firm, First Boston, and other investment banking houses benefited competitively from interest-rate regulation. Raising capital for long-term projects, investment bankers naturally attracted investors more easily if the competing opportunities at banks and other institutions were limited on what returns they could offer.

No one in finance is, of course, a neutral observer, but Wojnilower’s case speaks for broader public interests. Capital formation, raising funds for new productive capacity, ought to enjoy some preference if long-term economic growth is the goal. Moreover, in Wojnilower’s argument, the higher interest rates are themselves a principal source of inflation and instability (a point that faintly echoes the Islamic economists’ complaint against the Western banking system).

24. Volcker’s comments, House Banking Committee, February 15, 1980. chapter 6: The Roller Coaster

1. Representative Annunzio’s barb, House Banking Committee, July 23, 1980.

2. Details on credit controls, Federal Reserve Board press release, and President Carter’s statement, Presidential Documents, March 14, 1980.

3. Fred Weimer, interview, December 13, 1984; Duncan Muir, interview, January 2, 1985; Dick Rossi, public relations manager of VISA, December 10, 1984. The added charges for credit imposed by retailers were documented in an evaluation of credit controls by the House Banking Committee, December 4, 1980.

4. Television’s impact. The CBS, NBC and ABC evening news coverage for several days following the announcement of credit controls was reviewed from the broadcast archives at Vanderbilt University. Both the tone and content of all three networks were responsible and accurate, devoid of the exaggeration that some viewers attributed to them.

5. Recollections of receiving bricks and two-by-fours in the mail from distraught home builders are frequently offered by top-level Federal Reserve officials. Many still keep the objects on their office desks as souvenirs of battle.

6. Volcker denies paternity for recession, MacNeil/Lehrer Report, April 21, 1980.

7. My brief description of the silver debacle depends largely on the compelling narrative by Stephen Fay, Beyond Greed, Viking Press, 1982, as well as the subsequent congressional reports cited in Chapter 4.

8. Both Philip Coldwell and a staff member of the Senate Banking Committee described to me how Congress lobbied the Federal Reserve to get assistance for the banks and the Hunts.

9. When the banks arranged the $1.1 billion loan to the Hunts, Volcker insisted on two conditions. First, the Hunts must cease the silver speculation. Second, they must dispose of their vast silver holdings in an orderly manner. The second condition, as it turned out, appeared to be another commandment from the Federal Reserve that the banks would ignore, without consequence.

The Wall Street Journal, October 18, 1984, reported that the Hunts were still holding nearly 60 million ounces of silver. One year later, the Journal reported on October 3, 1985, that the Hunts had finally disposed of their hoard, more than five years after the original commitment to do so. The Journal said the sell-off was motivated by the Hunts’ financial distress, their need to raise large sums of cash to pay off bank loans to their oil enterprises.

10. The 1980 targets for M-l and other aggregates were announced in Monetary Policy Report to Congress, February 19, 1980, in Annual Report, Federal Reserve Board, 1980.

For clarity’s sake, the statistics used are for the shift-adjusted aggregate, known as Ml-B. If the traditional aggregate, now called Ml-A, were cited, the money changes up and down would look even more extreme. The distinctions between the two are explained later in the narrative when they become more important in the decision making of 1981.

I am particularly indebted to Philip Braverman, chief economist at Briggs Schaedle in New York, and Daniel Brill, retired research director at the Federal Reserve Board, for explaining the subtle mechanics of how the Fed controls money.

11. John Maynard Keynes, A Treatise on Money, Macmillan, 1930.

12. Henry Wallich’s analysis is from his speech, “The Limits of Monetary Control,” April 3, 1980.

13. Housing starts, Wall Street Journal, July 18, 1980.

14. John Paulus, interviews, May 13 and July 3, 1985.

15. Volcker on money supply bouncing back, “A Talk with Paul Volcker,” by Andrew Tobias, New York Times Magazine, September 19, 1982.

16. Shadow Open Market Committee papers, September 21-22, 1980.

17. Political scientist Edward R. Tufte studied the “electoral-economic cycle” of monetary policy and concluded: “What is probably most important is that the 1972 election was nothing special. Historically, the supply of money increased more rapidly in the two years before presidential elections than in the two years following ... It appears that anti-inflationary zeal flourishes in the politically slack period after presidential elections, rarely before.” The events of 1980 were clearly an exception to Tufte’s conclusion. See Edward R. Tufte, Political Control of the Economy, Princeton University Press, 1978.

See also David Meiselman, “The Political Monetary Cycle,” Wall Street Journal, January 10, 1984, for a concise example of the monetarist analysis. Both economics and political science have produced extensive studies attempting to measure the link between the electoral calendar and government economic policies. The problem with most of them is that the results usually imply more than they prove. There is a relationship, no doubt, but it does not have much meaning unless one examines the actual transactions of the policy makers. The statistical evidence is often misleading because it implies that the actual economic results were always what the policy makers intended.

18. Bert Lance, interview, November 19, 1984.

19. Miller’s complaint, Wall Street Journal, September 12, 1980. Carter’s criticism, Presidential Documents, October 2, and Carter-Reagan debate, October 28, 1980.

20. Year-after criticisms, Wall Street Journal, October 3, 1980.

21. Volcker on 1980s ‘'holding action,” speech, November 20, 1980.

chapter 7: The God Almighty Dollar

1. Barton Lidice Benes, interview, November 28, 1984. The Benes exhibit, entitled “Master of Disguise,” was at the Federal Reserve Board in November and December, 1984, and later at the Dallas and Cleveland Federal Reserve Banks.

2. Details on the history of money have been drawn from a variety of sources, including John Kenneth Galbraith’s Mojyey: Whence It Came, Where It Went, Houghton Mifflin. 1975; Wright Patman’s A Primer on Money, House Banking Committee, 1964; various Federal Reserve System pamphlets; and the works cited subsequently in this chapter.

3. John Maynard Keynes, A Treatise on Money, Macmillan, 1930.

4. Sigmund Freud’s letters to Wilhelm Fliess in The Origins of Psychoanalysis, Basic Books, 1954; “Character and Anal Eroticism,” in Freud Collected Papers, Volume 2, Leonard and Virginia Woolf and the Institute of Psycho-analysis, 1925; and “Transformation of Instincts,” in Basic Works of Sigmund Freud, Franklin Library, 1978.

5. Michael T. Taussig’s study, The Devil and Commodity Fetishism in South America, University of North Carolina Press, 1980, describes the similarities between contemporary peasant myths and the medieval Christian idea of usury as the devil’s work. Taussig writes, for instance:

Whereas the imagery of God or the fertility spirits of nature dominates the ethos of labor in the peasant mode of production, the devil and evil flavor the metaphysics of the capitalist mode of production. . . . Among the displaced Afro-American peasants who are employed as wage workers by the rapidly expanding sugarcane plantations at the southern end of the tropical Cauca Valley in Colombia are some who are supposed to enter into secret contracts with the devil in order to increase their production and hence their wage. . . . Somewhat similarly, displaced Indian peasants who work as wage-earning tin miners in the Bolivian highlands have created work-group rituals to the devil, whom they regard as the true owner of the mine and the mineral. They do this, it is said, to maintain production, to find rich ore-bearing veins and to reduce accidents. Although he is believed to sustain production, the devil is also seen as gluttonous spirit bent on destruction and death.

6. The Origins of Psychoanalysis (see above).

7. Georg Simmel, The Philosophy of Money, Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1978, and The Sociology of Georg Simmel, The Free Press, 1950.

8. Thorstein Veblen, The Theory of the Leisure Class, Penguin Books, 1981.

9. Georg Simmel, The Philosophy of Money (see above).

10. Norman O. Brown, “Filthy Lucre,” in Life Against Death: The Psychoanalytical Meaning of History, Wesleyan University Press, 1959.

11. John Maynard Keynes, “Economic Possibilities for Our Grandchildren,” in Essays in Persuasion, Harcourt Brace, 1932.

chapter 8: Democratic Money

1. Lawrence Goodwyn’s powerful account of the Populist experience was an important corrective, rescuing the agrarian reformers from the disparagement by other modern historians who concentrated on their raw and ugly qualities, the nativist resentments and paranoia, and ignored their intellectual contributions. Goodwyn’s full scholarly account was published as Democratic Promise: The Populist Moment in America, Oxford University Press, 1976. A condensed version is available as The Populist Moment: A Short History of the Agrarian Revolt in America, Oxford University Press, 1978.

2. Details on post-Civil War commodity prices are from Goodwyn (above); Milton Friedman and Anna Jacobson Schwartz, A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-1960, Princeton University Press, 1963; and Robert P. Sharkey, Money, Class and Party: An Economic Study of Civil War and Reconstruction, Johns Hopkins Press, 1959. Sharkey provides an excellent account of the political struggle surrounding restoration of the gold standard.

3. The discussion of U.S. inflation and deflation under the gold standard is based on the price indexes published in Historical Statistics of the United States, Colonial Times to 1970, Census Bureau, 1976.

4. Fernand Braudel, The Structures of Everyday Life: The Limits of the Possible, the first of his three-volume history of civilization and capitalism, Harper and Row, 1981.

5. The panic of 1893, Milton Friedman and Anna Jacobson Schwartz, A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-1960 (see above).

6. The account of Jacksonian values and the destruction of the second Bank of the United States relies on the brilliant essay by Marvin Meyers, The Jacksonian Persuasion: Politics and Belief, Stanford University Press, 1957. Bray Hammond’s phrase—“reckless, booming anarchy”—appeared in “Jackson, Biddle and the Bank of the United States,” Journal of Economic History, May 1947.

7. William P. Yohe’s analysis, “An Economic Appraisal of the Sub-Treasury Plan,” was published as an appendix to Goodwyn’s Democratic Promise and The Populist Moment (see above). Keynes’s salute to the Populists is quoted in Yohe’s essay.

8. The most prominent advocate of restoring the gold standard was Alan Greenspan, the financial consultant and former presidential advisor who was nominated in June 1987 as Paul Volcker’s successor as Federal Reserve chairman. In a September 1, 1981, essay in The Wall Street Journal, “Can the U.S. Return to a Gold Standard?” Greenspan answered in the affirmative but with heavy qualifications. The transition back to gold-based currency would be most difficult but beneficial, Greenspan wrote, because it would compel Congress and the President to limit federal spending. He described himself as “attracted to the prospect of gold convertibility.”

“Certainly a gold-based monetary system will not necessarily prevent fiscal imprudence, as twentieth century history clearly demonstrates,” Greenspan wrote. “Nonetheless, once achieved, the discipline of the gold standard would surely reinforce anti-inflation policies, and make it far more difficult to resume financial profligacy.” Gold, he suggested, might be phased in gradually, by issuing limited amounts of currency backed by a gold guarantee until the full standard was possible.

Greenspan, however, was not counted as a true believer by the Journal's regular contributors, who were zealous advocates of gold. They included Jude Wan-niski, president of Polyconomics, a consulting firm, and his associate Alan Reynolds, Rep. Jack Kemp of New York, Lewis E. Lehrman, former president of the Rite Aid Corporation, and the “supply-side” economist Arthur Laffer.

One measure of the intellectual confusion among gold advocates, however, was that they did not agree among themselves on what the correct price of gold ought to be, and their answers ranged widely from $250 to $500 an ounce. As history demonstrated, setting the correct price for gold was always the impossible political question. A price set too low would be disastrously deflationary, ruining producers while it enriched the owners of capital. A price that was too high would be stimulative and inflationary at first, then act as an arbitrary price brake on the economy. For a thorough and persuasive description of all the unresolved problems facing a gold standard, see Anna J. Schwartz, “Alternative Monetary Regime: The Gold Standard,” Report of the Commission on the Role of Gold in the Domestic and International Monetary Systems, March 1982.

9. Kelso’s analysis of capitalism and ownership can be found in The Capitalist Manifesto, with Mortimer J. Adler, Random House, 1958; Two-Factor Theory: The Economics of Reality, with Patricia Hetter, Vintage, 1968; and “The Right to Be Productive,” with Patricia Hetter, The Financial Planner, August-Sep-tember 1982. Kelso interview, October 9, 1985.

Paul Volcker is among those who have endorsed the idea of employee stock ownership as a way to ameliorate inflationary wage pressures, though Volcker, of course, opposes Kelso’s more radical concept for financing broadened ownership through the money-creation system. Volcker told a Texas business audience on November 13, 1983:

I wonder why there has been so much apparent resistance, by labor and management, to planned arrangements for sharing in prosperity and adversity, in the latter instance in ways other than layoffs alone. I am thinking, of course, of profit-sharing plans or other ways of rewarding workers when things are good, without building in a floor on costs that may turn out to be unbearable when things are not. I wonder why more companies have not been successful, or have not made the effort to encourage employee stock ownership.

chapter 9: The Great Compromise

1. The Wall Street Journal on J. P. Morgan, quoted in Literary Digest, February 17, 1912.

2. Morgan Guaranty’s reputation as the “Fed bank” is from background interviews with Fed officials and Volcker’s personal friends. “The Morgan bank plays by the rules,” an officer of the New York Fed explained. “They really come in and tell us what they’re going to do. Citibank would much rather stake out a position, invest in it and challenge us to adjust to it and fight us all the way.”

The Federal Reserve, likewise, relied on officers of Morgan Guaranty as a source of financial intelligence. The small circle of people considered social intimates of Paul Volcker included Lewis T. Preston, CEO of the Morgan bank. “We probably get more regular intelligence on what’s going on in credit markets from Morgan than from anyone else,” the New York Fed officer said.

Morgan Stanley, the investment banking firm that also descended from the house of Morgan, was also close to the Fed, partly because of a number of its senior managers were former executives of the New York Federal Reserve.

3. Roger T. Johnson, Historical Beginnings . . . The Federal Reserve, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, 1977.

4. Gabriel Kolko’s analysis of the “conservative triumph” represented in the Federal Reserve Act and other reforms from the Progressive era is supported by his extraordinary historical research—exhaustive evidence unearthed from the private communications of business and banking leaders as well as the legislative draftsmen that confirms the actual political intentions beneath the rhetoric of reform as well as the economic consequences. Kolko’s conclusions challenge both the inherited mythology advanced by most historians and political scientists and the misconceptions that prevailed among reformers at the time, but his analysis makes plausible the subsequent behavior and posture of the Federal Reserve in a way that the competing interpretations do not. If creation of the Fed was intended to break the “money trust,” then why did the new institution collaborate so closely with it? Kolko, The Triumph of Conservatism: A Reinterpretation of American History, 1900—1916, Macmillan, 1963.

5. The Treasury study on dispersion of banking power is cited by Alexander D. Noyes, “The Money Trust,” Atlantic Monthly, May 1913.

6. The account of the legislative debates draws upon the Congressional Record of 1913 and these accounts: Gabriel Kolko, The Triumph of Conservatism (see above); Milton Friedman and Anna Jacobson Schwartz, A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-1960, Princeton University Press, 1963; Noyes’s “The Money Trust” (see above); Roger T. Johnson, Historical Beginnings . . . The Federal Reserve (see above); and Richard H. Timberlake, The Origins of Central Banking in the United States, Harvard University Press, 1978.

7. The original system operated differently in that the Federal Reserve Banks provided Discount loans in exchange for any eligible debt paper presented by commercial banks—which meant that the portfolios of the Federal Reserve Banks were composed largely of private loan paper, not Treasury notes and bonds. The modern Fed’s holdings, in contrast, are largely government securities. An intriguing and largely unexamined question is the potential economic effect from whether the central bank trades business notes or government debt issues. The orthodox view is that it makes no difference, that the money-creation powers functioned the same, regardless. A senior vice president of the New York Federal Reserve Bank remarked: “As far as the money supply is concerned, we could buy and sell eggs and it would have the same effect.” But his example suggests the subtle difference: if the Federal Reserve was “lender of last resort” to the egg market, that would likely encourage egg production and it would certainly help stabilize the market for eggs. Similarly, if the central bank held a substantial portion of its portfolio in private commercial debt paper, the financing for real enterprises in the productive economy, the central bankers would presumably have greater concern for whether their policies were threatening those enterprises with failure. The Fed’s portfolio of U.S. debt paper, in other words, permits greater detachment from the real economic consequences.

8. Benjamin Strong’s comment is from the biography by Lester V. Chandler, Benjamin Strong, Central Banker, The Brookings Institution, 1958.

9. Walter Lippmann, Public Opinion, Harcourt, Brace, 1922.

10. Richard Hofstadter, quoted in Roger T. Johnson’s history of the Fed (see above), was the leading exponent of the liberal reform perspective, the orthodox interpretation that Gabriel Kolko challenged.

11. Walt Whitman, “Song of Myself,” The Oxford Book of American Verse, Oxford University Press, 1950. The artist’s imaginative interpretation of economics, suggested here but briefly, is another of the great unexplored realms— like the psychology of economics—that scholars have failed to approach, perhaps intimidated by the scientific presumptions of their colleagues, the economists. If artistic expressions speak authentically for the society’s inner responses to reality, what people feel and think about their experience, then it seems odd that economic interpretation has mostly ignored the cultural messages from literature, music and film about the nature of American economic life.

12. Details on the Federal Reserve’s first two decades are from Milton Friedman and Anna Jacobson Schwartz (see above); Lester V. Chandler’s biography of Benjamin Strong (see above); and Jane D’Arista, “Federal Reserve Structure and the Development of Monetary Policy: 1915-1935,” House Banking Committee, 1971.

13. Andrew Mellon’s contribution to tax politics during the 1920s—like the Federal Reserve’s role as economic regulator—was seemingly discredited by the Great Crash and, therefore, largely ignored by mainstream discussion of political economy for two generations. Both contributions never lost their relevance, however, and both Mellon’s “trickle down” tax policy and the Fed’s economic prowess regained political hegemony in the 1980s. An excellent condensed history of the political arguments surrounding the progressive income tax can be found in “From Redistributive to Hegemonic Logic: The Transformation of American Tax Politics, 1894—1963,” by Ronald Frederick King, in Politics & Society, 1983.

14. 1920s: Robert S. McElvaine, The Great Depression, Times Books, 1984.

15. The farmer-Fed dialogue is from “The Federal Reserve Bank and the Farmer and the Stockman,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, April 1923.

16. Strong’s comments on the Federal Reserve caught in the middle are quoted in John Maynard Keynes’s A Treatise on Money, Macmillan, 1930.

17. Federal Reserve behavior during the great contraction is drawn mainly from Milton Friedman and Anna Jacobson Schwartz and from Jane D’Arista. Strong’s prophetic warnings are from Lester V. Chandler’s biography. All these works are cited above.

18. Like Kolko’s research, Gerald Epstein and Thomas Ferguson’s close study of the central bank’s archives produced a strikingly different interpretation of the Federal Reserve’s performance and actual intentions from 1929 to 1933. In addition to the evidence they unearthed in private letters and discussions, they conducted various economic tests of their thesis and found that the credit data produced by Fed policy supported the conclusion that Fed actions were guided by the earnings condition of commercial banks. Epstein and Ferguson, “Monetary Policy, Loan Liquidation, and Industrial Conflict: The Federal Reserve and the Open Market Operations of 1932,” Journal of Economic History, December 1984.

chapter 10: Leaning Against the Wind

1. Marriner Eccles’s memoir is a neglected gem of American political history, a lucid, idiosyncratic and authoritative account of the New Deal: Beckoning Frontiers: Public and Personal Recollections, edited by Sidney Hyman, Alfred A. Knopf, 1951. I have also drawn on Eccles’s Economic Balance and a Balanced Budget, Da Capo Press, 1973, and L. Dwight Israelson, “Marriner Eccles, Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board,” American Economic Review, May 1985. The Eccles remarks throughout this chapter, unless otherwise cited, are from these sources.

2. The evolution of Keynesian ideas is from John Kenneth Galbraith’s Money: Whence It Came, Where It Went, Houghton Mifflin, 1975.

3. A good description of how New Deal reforms influenced commercial and investment banking and their continued relationships can be found in David M. Kotz, Bank Control of Large Corporations in the United States, University of California Press, 1978.

4. The reform of the Federal Reserve in 1935 changed the titles of its officers. Originally, the Reserve Bank executives were called governors and only the chairman of the board held the same title. After 1935, the Reserve Bank officers were called presidents and all board members became governors. To minimize confusion, I have avoided using the title of governor as it was applied in the years from 1913 to 1935.

5. John T. Woolley’s research on FOMC voting patterns also found that governors appointed by Democrats tended to be slightly more liberal than governors appointed by Republicans. Woolley, Monetary Politics, Cambridge University Press, 1984.

6. The psychological and moral perspectives of Keynes, as well as interesting accounts of his background, are described in various essays in The End of the Keynesian Era, edited by Robert Skidelsky, Macmillan, 1977.

7. Eccles’s comment on the Fed’s obligations to the executive branch is from a speech by his nephew Spencer F. Eccles at the dedication of the Marriner S. Eccles Federal Reserve Board Building, July 28, 1983.

8. Paul Volcker’s 1949 senior thesis at Princeton University, “The Problems of Federal Reserve Policy Since World War II.”

9. Wright Patman’s critique is from his A Primer on Money, House Banking Committee, 1964.

10. William McChesney Martin’s reminiscence was in The New York Times, December 10, 1985.

11. Wright Patman’s A Primer on Money (see above).

12. John T. Woolley, Monetary Politics (see above).

13. Arthur Okun was quoted by Paul Volcker in his New York University lecture “The Rediscovery of the Business Cycle,” Free Press, 1978.

14. I am indebted to the British journalist Stephen Fay for sharing his 1979 manuscript on Paul Volcker and allowing me to quote from the material. Volcker’s remarks on the 1965 economic policy and his commentary on the shift from fixed to floating exchange rates during the Nixon Administration are drawn from Fay’s interviews.

15. Quoted in John Kenneth Galbraith, Money: Whence It Came, Where It Went (see above).

16. The gold-dollar imbalance is explained by Robert Triffin, “Correcting the World Monetary Scandal,” Challenge, January-February 1986. OPEC’s role in inflation, Wall Street Journal, January 30, 1986.

17. A chapter entitled “Hardball” in William Safire’s White House memoir describes the pressure tactics used on Arthur Burns. Before the Fall, Doubleday, 1975.

18. Former Governor Andrew F. Brimmer, more than a decade after the 1972 election, delivered a meticulous defense of Arthur Burns’s performance that year. Many details are drawn from Brimmer’s account, “Politics and Monetary Policy: The Federal Reserve and the Nixon White House,” Eastern Economic Association, March 1984. For a broader and less sympathetic interpretation of how politics influences the Fed, see Edward Tufte, Political Control of the Economy, Princeton University Press, 1978.

Brimmer and others have particularly attempted to refute a more contentious account of how Burns manipulated policy in 1972 by Sanford Rose, “The Agony of the Federal Reserve,” Fortune, July 1974. Rose reported, on the basis of confidential sources, that at one point when Burns could not win agreement he returned to the FOMC meeting and announced meaningfully: “I have just talked to the White House.” Rose wrote: “ . . . the committee got the idea: the White House was determined to try to keep rates from rising.” Burns,

Brimmer and other governors have vigorously denied that any such exchange occurred.

19. Burns’s exchange with Senator Proxmire, Joint Economic Committee, February 7, 1975.

20. As assortment of internal staff memos to Burns, made available by a former associate, makes it clear that winning reappointment was a major preoccupation in 1977.

21. Volcker’s lecture on the “long cycle” was entitled “The Rediscovery of the Business Cycle” (see above).

chapter 11: A Car with Two Drivers

1. President Reagan’s statements are from his Inaugural Address, January 20, 1981; address to Congress, February 18, 1981; and an interview with Walter Cronkite, March 3, 1981.

2. Volcker’s speeches were before the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee School of Business Administration, November 20, 1980, and the Tax Foundation dinner in New York City, December 3, 1980.

3. The most complete and informed press coverage of the Federal Reserve could be found, not surprisingly, in The Wall Street Journal. Its readers were not only more sophisticated about finance but intensely more interested in monetary policy. For some years, the high quality of the Journal's news coverage was tarnished somewhat by an obvious monetarist bias, relying on the opinions of Milton Friedman and like-minded economists. The Journal's editorial page, meanwhile, advocated the gold standard and criticized the Federal Reserve from that angle. Both perspectives, of course, represented a hard-money bias and were thus compatible with the interests of the Journal's wealthy readership.

In general, press coverage of the central bank failed to scrutinize monetary policy with the same intensity it applied to the rest of government. If, however, Congress or the White House happened to attack the Federal Reserve, the press usually treated their complaints as an embarrassing irregularity, offensive to the way government was supposed to operate. Politicians were inhibited from criticizing monetary policy by the knowledge that they would almost certainly be criticized in the press for intruding on the Federal Reserve’s supposed independence.

4. Volcker’s remarks are from his speeches cited above. His comments to congressional committees included testimony before the House Banking Committee, February 26, 1981.

5. Bruno Pasquinelli, David Chatham, William Cahill and Lucille Sajec are quoted from their testimony before the House Banking Committee’s “Grassroots Hearings on the Economy,” September 9 to December 7, 1981.

6. Paul Craig Roberts, interviews, March 22 and June 15, 1984.

7. William Niskanen, interview, April 18, 1985.

8. Beryl Sprinkel’s food-and-money comparison was before the House Banking Committee, February 1, 1982.

9. Sprinkel, Jordan and Weidenbaum criticisms of the Fed, Wall Street Journal, January 26, April 20 and August 4, 1981. Stockman’s was in “Avoiding a GOP Economic Dunkirk,” a pre-inaugural memo he prepared for the President, December 1980.

10. Sprinkel memo, “Memorandum for the Cabinet Council on Economic Affairs, Subject: Domestic Monetary Policy,” April 24, 1981.

11. The President’s program is detailed in “America’s New Beginning: A Program for Economic Recovery,” Presidential Documents, February 18, 1981.

12. David Stockman, interviews, August 16 and September 22, 1985.

13. Donald Regan speech, Treasury release, March 23, 1981.

14. Stockman’s prediction of historic bull market is from the author’s The Education of David Stockman and Other Americans, E. P. Dutton, 1982.

15. Henry Wallich speech, February 13, 1981.

16. Henry Kaufman’s predictions, Washington Post, March 6, 1981, and Wall Street Journal, May 11, 1981.

17. Donald Regan on bond traders, Wall Street Journal, June 1, 1981.

18. The wealth statistics are from the “Survey of Consumer Finances, 1983,” Federal Reserve Bulletin, September and December 1984. “Financial Characteristics of High-Income Families,” based on the same survey, was published separately in the Federal Reserve Bulletin, March 1986. The private ownership of government bonds was calculated from the 1981 Annual Statistical Digest, Federal Reserve Board.

19. The selected comments from bond-market participants, as well as details on corporate bond issues, were culled from The Wall Street Journal's daily “Credit Markets” column during the month of April 1981.

20. Jack Kemp’s complaint, Washington Post, May 7, 1981.

21. Sprinkel’s analysis is from “Memorandum for the Cabinet Council on Economic Affairs, Subject: Briefing on the State of Financial Markets,” undated.

22. Kudlow’s analysis is in “Memorandum for the Cabinet Council on Economic Affairs, Subject: Financial Warnings,” April 28, 1981.

23. Sprinkel’s memo “Briefing on the State of Financial Markets” (see above).

24. Donald Regan’s comment on “abolishing the Fed,” Paul Craig Roberts, The Supply-Side Revolution: An Insider s Account of Policymaking in Washington, Harvard University Press, 1984.





25. The technical reforms that monetarists and the White House urged the Federal Reserve to adopt all dealt with operating refinements in how reserves were controlled in the banking system. The proposals included: contemporaneous reporting of bank reserves instead of the two-week lag that the Federal Reserve permitted, a penalty rate for Discount loans, and targeting operating decisions on a broader measure, the monetary base, instead of the nonborrowed reserves target that the Fed was using. The arguments over techniques involve highly complex questions and are best left to economists who are expert on the functions of money and banking. A full and evenhanded discussion of the operating options, the relative advantages and disadvantages of what the monetarists proposed, can be found in Michael G. Hadjimichalakis, The Federal Reserve, Money, and Interest Rates: The Volcker Years and Beyond, Praeger, 1984.

26. Sprinkel comments on the Fed’s improvement, Wall Street Journal, May 5, 1981, and his Chicago speech, May 29, 1981.

27. Stockman on the Fed’s making peace, interview, May 16, 1981.

28. Volcker’s speech on gradualism, April 15, 1981.

29. To minimize confusion, the text continues to cite statistics as M-l rather than M-1B, even though the FOMC was tracking the adjusted aggregate rather than the traditional money measure. The differences in their growth rates varied slightly month to month but followed the same trend line.

30. Peter Fousek, interview, June 26, 1984. Background interviews with numerous staff economists at Reserve Banks and the Federal Reserve Board raised the problem of a “monetarist trap.” Many staff members familiar with the FOMC decisions were convinced that the policy makers were more stringent than they otherwise would have been, both to defend the integrity of their operating method and also to offset the inflationary fears generated in financial markets by the Reagan tax cuts.

31. Michael G. Hadjimichalakis, The Federal Reserve, Money, and Interest Rates (see above).

32. One of the Federal Reserve’s gravest offenses against democratic selfgovernment is its most obvious trait, the secrecy. The Federal Reserve does not tell citizens the plain truth about what it is doing to the economy and, as a result, many plunge forward innocently into enterprises that the federal government has doomed. What is especially mindless is that frequently private enterprises will be encouraged, even subsidized, by other agencies of the government at the very time the Fed is imposing the adverse conditions.

From time to time, reformers have tried to reconcile this dilemma with marginal proposals—measures requiring the Federal Reserve to be more candid about itself, to report its decisions more promptly and submit its budgets to congressional scrutiny. None of these reforms would likely accomplish much, even if enacted. The Federal Reserve would simply have to devise new ways to avoid frank disclosure of its intentions. It must obscure in order to survive.

Given its anomalous position in the constellation of political power, it is inconceivable that the Federal Reserve could ever speak freely and plainly to the general public. It would be overwhelmed with political complaints, for instance, if it announced in advance that it intended to induce a recession, and probably not even its influential supporters in finance would be able to save it. Citizens would question the decision and the methods of liquidation. Eventually, they would ask why this momentous decision for the entire nation was delegated to an assembly of unelected technocrats, without even the requirement to consult Congress or the President.

The secrecy and evasion are integral to the Federal Reserve’s power and it, therefore, fails the minimum prerequisite for representative democracy—that the government must deal honestly with the citizens whom it governs. To resolve the dilemma, the powers of the central bank would have to be relocated elsewhere in the government where decisions could be examined in democratic forums and the decision makers held accountable in democratic elections.

33. Lawrence Kudlow, interviews, October 24, 1983, and July 9, 1985.

34. Roberts’s description of the June 5 meeting is from his book The Supply-Side Revolution (see above). President Reagan’s speech to the nation was on July 27, 1981. The tax bill was signed into law August 13.

35. Manuel H. Johnson, interview, December 3, 1984.

36. Alan Blinder, interview, March 26, 1985.

37. Effective tax rates after 1981 were calculated by the Joint Committee on Taxation, Washington Post, November 20, 1984.

38. Volcker’s evasive answers, Senate Banking Committee, July 22, 1981.

39. Paul A. Samuelson, “Evaluating Reaganomics,” Challenge, November-December 1984.

40. Bank prime rate and inflation, David Jones of Aubrey G. Lanston & Company, cited in National Association of Home Builders newsletter, April 1981.

41. Real interest rates on long-term bonds are from Robert A. Johnson, “Anticipated Fiscal Contraction: The Economic Consequences of the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings Bill for the U.S. Economy,” Federal Reserve Board, February 1986.

chapter 12: That Old-Time Religion

1. Elizabeth Brock is quoted from her testimony before the House Banking Committee’s “Grassroots Hearings on the Economy,” September 9 to December 7, 1981 (hereinafter referred to as the “Grassroots Hearings”).

2. The details on General Electric’s Appliance Park are from Jim Allen, communications director, interview, July 15, 1985.

3. Eldon Kirsch is quoted from his testimony before the Grassroots Hearings.

4. Robert Williams is quoted from his testimony before the Grassroots Hearings.

5. Arthur Estrella and James McCafferty are quoted from their testimony before the Grassroots Hearings.

6. Durward DeChenne, interview, October 8, 1984.

7. Jim Clark, interview, April 4, 1985.

8. Manny Dembs is quoted from his testimony before the Senate Banking Committee, November 20, 1981.

9. Martin Bacal is quoted from his testimony before the Grassroots Hearings.

10. Data on bank profits are from “Profitability of Insured Commercial Banks in 1984,” Federal Reserve Bulletin, November 1985; “Financial Developments of Bank Holding Companies in 1984,” Federal Reserve Bulletin, December 1985; and E. Gerald Corrigan, “Are Banks Special?,” in Minneapolis Federal Reserve Bank Annual Report, 1982. Gerald Epstein’s comparisons are from his testimony before the House Banking Committee, July 19, 1983.

11. Federal Advisory Council minutes, September 11, 1981.

12. George Bush’s remarks on the French are reported in “Minutes, Cabinet Council on Economic Affairs,” July 7, 1981.

13i Dollar appreciation from July 1980 to September 1981 cited by Beryl Sprin-kel, “Memorandum for the Cabinet Council on Economic Affairs, Subject: U.S. Exchange Market Intervention Policy,” September 16, 1981.

14. Wanniski’s letter to Reagan, November 18, 1981, and the President’s reply, December 17, 1981.

15. Reagan on the “Carter depression,” Lou Cannon, Reagan, G. P. Putman, 1982.

16. The President’s speech to the nation, September 24, 1981.

17. Reagan’s long-standing views on the need for economic pain as the cure for inflation are described by Rowland Evans and Robert Novak, The Reagan Revolution, E. P. Dutton, 1981.

18. Public attitudes on recession were reported by Kermit Lansner of the Harris organization, Making Sense of the News, Modern Media Institute, 1982.

19. Volcker on the need for tax increases, Wall Street Journal, November 12,

1981.

20. Donald Regan on economic recovery, Wall Street Journal, November 10,

1981.

21. Sprinkel’s analysis is from “Memorandum for Cabinet Council on Economic Affairs, Subject: Financial Market Developments,” November 12, 1981.

22. Baker and other Republican leaders’ complaints, New York Times, September 10, 1981.

23. Howard Baker, interview, January 22, 1986.

24. Volcker speech to National Press Club, September 25, 1981.

25. The unusual stringency of monetary policy in the fall of 1981 is described by former Governor Andrew F. Brimmer in “Monetary Policy and Economic

Activity: Benefits and Costs of Monetarism,” American Economic Review, May 1983.

26. Details on the capital ratio regulation, National Journal, December 17, 1983. The capital data for 1981 are from “Financial Developments of Bank Holding Companies in 1984,” Federal Reserve Bulletin, December 1985.

27. Walter Wriston’s remarks are from “Recycling Revisited,” June 4, 1981, and “Going to Hell in a Best-Fit Curve,” March 6, 1981; G. A. Costanzo’s essay is “The Positive Effect of LDC Lending,” May 1981. All published by Citibank. Subsequent remarks by Wriston and Costanzo in this chapter are from the same sources.

28. Henry Wallich’s speech on LDC debt, June 2, 1981.

29. Federal Advisory Council minutes, November 6, 1981.

30. William McChesney Martin, quoted in New York Times, December 10, 1985.

31. Federal Advisory Council minutes, November 6, 1981.

32. President’s press conference, January 19, 1982.

33. Donald Regan quoted in Wall Street Journal, January 29, 1982.

34. Sprinkel’s warning was in “Memorandum for Cabinet Council on Economic Affairs, Subject: Financial Market Developments.” December 18, 1981.

35. Kudlow’s warning was in “Memorandum for Cabinet Council on Economic Affairs, Subject: Financial and Economic Update,” January 18, 1982.

36. Frank Morris speech, Atlanta, March 17, 1982.

37. President’s press conference. February 18, 1982.

38. John Paulus, interview, July 3, 1985.

chapter 13: Slaughter of the Innocents

1. Kudlow’s remark was in “Memorandum for Cabinet Council on Economic Affairs, Subject: Financial and Economic Update,” January 18, 1982.

2. Thorstein Veblen’s commentary in this chapter is from Absentee Ownership and Business Enterprise in Recent Times: The Case of America, B. W. Huebsch, 1923.

3. Details on plant closings were compiled by the Bureau of National Affairs, Washington, D.C., 1982.

4. Unemployment by industrial sector was reported by the AFL-CIO research department, 1982.

5. Bankruptcy data were reported in “State of Small Business, 1983,” the Small Business Administration, and “1982-83 Business Failure Record,” Dun & Bradstreet, 1984.

6. The Urban Institute’s calculation of recession losses was described by John L. Palmer and Isabel V. Sawhill, editors, in The Reagan Record, Ballinger, 1984.

7. The growth of service jobs was reported by Governor Preston Martin, House Banking Committee, June 1, 1983.

8. John Zanetti, interview, July 3. 1985.

9. Joan Benigno. interview, July 13, 1985.

10. The home builders’ “wanted” poster, Len Mills, interview, March 28, 1985.

11. Assailant at the Fed. Washington Post, December 8, 1981.

12. John T. Woolley, Monetary Politics: The Federal Reserve and the Politics of Monetary Policy, Cambridge University Press, 1984.

13. Most-important citizens were listed in U.S. News & World Report, May 10,

1982.

14. People magazine’s article on Volcker, May 10, 1982.

15. Donald J. Mullineaux, “Monetary Rules and Contracts: Why Theory Loses to Practice,” Business Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, March/ April 1985.

16. Newsweek’s extensive profile, February 24, 1986. People magazine article (see above).

17. Volcker’s speech to the home builders’ convention, January 25, 1982.

18. Controlling inflation by other means would require politicians to confront a crucial point. The Federal Reserve gained hegemony and imposed its own solution of liquidation essentially because politicians had failed to address the great governing dilemma that destabilized Keynesian doctrine twenty years before— how to stimulate a robust economy without letting it get out of control. Democratic government knew how to do one but not the other. It was most adept at stimulating the economy but never found the will or the way to manage on the downside, to contain credit and expansion when the economy reached full capacity and inflation approached dangerous levels.

The independent existence of the Federal Reserve probably inhibits such reforms because adopting a different system would require politicians to challenge some of the most powerful interests as well as the free-market mythology. It is far easier to let the central bank deal with the nasty necessities in its own way.

A reformed system, governed by political managers, would begin with the proposition that pushing interest rates as high as 20 percent is unnecessarily destructive as well as grossly inequitable. The traditional argument against the political control of money is that elected politicians will refuse to do the hard part —to impose sufficient pain. Politicians, it is true, naturally hesitate to inflict injury on voters but, rather than a deficiency, this quality would be one of the major benefits of a democratized system. Once in charge, the President and Congress would have to find other ways to control things and they would discover there are many approaches less brutal than the general liquidation.

A democratized system, for instance, could for the first time coordinate all of the government’s many levers for influencing private economic behavior—moving them in the same direction to restrain credit and economic expansion. A series of more or less automatic stabilizers might be put in place, to be invoked by the President with congressional approval when inflationary conditions became dangerous. The tax code, for instance, could serve a discreet credit-control system, withdrawing part or all of the federal tax subsidy for interest costs as the economy reached full capacity or runaway inflation. Among other things, this would restrain the largest borrowers first and most effectively—not the weakest. Similar levers could decelerate or shut down the government’s own credit-subsidy programs in times of stress or impose temporary tax penalties on wage and price increases. If Congress and the President were in earnest, they could design similar restraints on themselves—a standing provision to curb budget deficits, either through automatic tax increases or spending cuts, that could be employed if inflation got out of hand.

If inflation were controlled in this manner, politicians would discover that monetary policy also had tools for restraint that the Federal Reserve generally did not use. The controls on credit supply that were once so effective with interest-rate ceilings could be restored but made more equitable. That would require rules for lending institutions on how scarce credit was to be allocated so that certain sectors like housing and autos or consumers did not absorb the punishment alone. The rules could be enforced through a system of differential reserve requirements on a bank’s loan portfolio, its assets, in addition to the reserve requirements on deposits. The priorities of bank lending could be guided further through penalty rates at the Discount window—aimed at banks that fueled inflation by making loans for speculation.

The essence of all these ideas is, of course, to restrain more broadly across the society and thus reduce the special damage that is now directed at a hapless minority. Until politicians are willing to invent a more sophisticated system to manage on the downside, the government will no doubt continue to rely on the crude methods of the Federal Reserve.

19. The discussion of feminine-masculine moral perspectives relies upon Carol Gilligan, In a Different Voice: Psychological Theory and Women s Development, Harvard University Press, 1982.

20. The examples of congressional “Fed bashing” were drawn from several exchanges, Senate Budget Committee, March 2, 1982; Joint Economic Committee, June 2, 1982; and Senate floor debate, December 18, 1982.

21. Edward Yardeni testified before the Senate Budget Committee, March 2,

1982. Robert Solow was quoted in The New York Times, April 1, 1982.

22. Senate floor debate, Congressional Record, December 18, 1982.

23. Dan Brill, interview, June 29, 1984.

24. Howard Baker, interview, January 22, 1986.

25. Liquidity strains were detailed in Lawrence Kudlow, “Financial and Economic Update—a Report on the Current Situation,” March 17, 1982.

26. Details on International Harvester are from the company’s 1982 annual report and The New York Times, February 19, 1986.

27. Adjustments in monetary policy were described in the annual report of the Open Market Desk, “Monetary Policy and Open Market Operations in 1982,” New York Federal Reserve Quarterly Review, Spring 1983.

28. The most intimate account of behind-the-scenes discussions surrounding Mexico’s financial crisis was reported by Joseph Kraft, “The Mexican Rescue,” Group of Thirty, 1984.

29. Details on the Drysdale failure are from The Wall Street Journal, May 20, 1982, and “Monetary Policy and Open Market Operations in 1982” (see above).

30. William M. Isaac, interviews, October 22 and November 14, 1985.

31. Jerry Jordan’s comment is from The Wall Street Journal, May 28, 1982.

32. Data on profits and bankruptcies were reported in The Wall Street Journal, May 6 and 24, 1982.

33. Lawrence Kudlow’s pessimistic analysis was in “Memorandum for the Cabinet Council on Economic Affairs, Subject: Economic and Financial Update,” April 16, 1982.

34. Financial-market reactions were reported in The Wall Street Journal, May 14, 1982, and the Washington Post, May 30, 1982. The survey of money managers was cited by Donald Regan in a speech, April 26, 1982

35. Nancy Teeters’s reaction was reported in the Washington Post, May 30, 1982.

chapter 14: The Turn

1. William M. Isaac’s remarks throughout this chapter are from interviews, October 22 and November 14, 1985.

2. Some of the details on Penn Square were drawn from Phillip L. Zweig, Belly Up: The Collapse of the Penn Square Bank, Crown, 1985.

3. Continental Illinois’s rapid growth, Wall Street Journal, July 30, 1984. Duns Review and Wall Street Journal accolades mentioned in Chicago Tribune, May 27, 1984.

4. Michael Bradfield’s remarks throughout this chapter are from a February 6, 1986, interview.

5. The Latin debt problems, Wall Street Journal, July 1, 1982.

6. Complaints from Milton Friedman and Beryl Sprinkel are from The Wall Street Journal, June 11 and June 28, 1982.

7. Market reactions to Penn Square are from the Federal Advisory Council minutes, September 17, 1982, and “Monetary Policy and Open Market Operations in 1982,” New York Federal Reserve Quarterly Review, Spring 1983.

8. Stock-market rally and reactions are from the Washington Post, August 18, 1982.

9. Senator Byrd’s speech on monetary reform was delivered in the Senate on August 3, 1982.

10. Volcker’s declaration of progress was made before the House Banking Committee, July 21, 1982, with further comments reported in The Wall Street Journal, August 10, 1982.

11. Senator Byrd’s claim that political pressure persuaded the Federal Reserve occurred in Senate debate on November 30, 1982.

12. Howard Baker, interview, January 22, 1986.

13. Some details on the debt crisis were drawn from Darrell Delamaide, Debt Shock: The Full Story of the World Credit Crisis, Doubleday, 1984.

14. The memorandum on Volcker’s meeting with Continental Illinois was read aloud to the author, but not made available, by Michael Bradfield, the general counsel.

15. The idea of making monetary policy directly subservient to the President is hardly a radical notion since central banks in most other industrial nations live comfortably enough with that arrangement. The Bank of England does not raise interest rates (or lower them) without discreetly obtaining permission from the Prime Minister’s Secretary of the Exchequer.

A more authentic democratization of the central bank would require a more visible process. The Federal Reserve would be stripped of its independent status and recast as a sub-agency of Treasury with presidential power to remove its chairman like any other appointed officer of government. A more coherent design, though obviously even more disruptive politically, would consolidate all of the government’s economic-management powers in one place, a new Cabinet office that combined elements of budget, taxation and monetary policies so that, at last these decisions would be coordinated.

In any of these arrangements, the twelve Federal Reserve Banks would become superfluous institutions. If there is genuine democratic control, there is no reason to let each Reserve Bank president have an independent vote on government economic policy or, for that matter, to let commercial bankers maintain their preferential influence on Federal Reserve policy. The twelve Reserve Banks would be reduced in status to their operating functions, like the regional offices in any federal department.

Once the Chief Executive takes responsibility for managing money, the role of Congress would follow naturally. It would begin to exercise normal congressional oversight, the regular scrutiny of agency operations and budget that it has never applied to the Federal Reserve. Inevitably, Congress would probably claim a more direct role in the making of monetary policy, presumably by enacting periodic instructions for the Executive Branch. Regular resolutions, enacted annually or every six months or even every quarter, could set rough boundaries for monetary policy and provide the public forum for the ongoing economic debate.

One practical advantage is obvious: a visible, accountable management process would exist in which to reconcile the competing forces of fiscal and monetary policy. Certainly, a unified system could not easily repeat the bizarre and devastating collision that occurred in the 1980s, when the federal government attempted simultaneously both to restrain and to stimulate.

A more rational governing system would not, of course, guarantee rational decisions, any more than democracy guarantees equity (or technocratic government guarantees “right” answers). Elected politicians do have certain virtues, however, that technocratic managers usually lack. In politics, they do not pretend to scientific certitude and so they will listen more earnestly to the random evidence of distress from citizens at large. Faced with conflict, politics inclines reflexively toward compromise, an improvised settlement that will lessen the harm to both sides. Furthermore, over time, democracy has the capacity for selfcorrection. Politicians forced to deal with the consequences of their economic folly might also have to pay the price themselves when they faced disappointed voters.

chapter 15: A Game of Chicken

1. Jude Wanniski, interviews, October 11, 1984, and March 27, 1985.

2. Money managers’ comments are from interviews, Craig Lewis, August 14, 1985; Mark Emerson, August 16, 1985; and Dean LeBaron, August 16, 1985.

3. “Fear vs. Greed” is from “Investment Strategy,” Merrill Lynch, February

1983.

4. Albert Wojnilower, quoted in Washington Post, September 22, 1982.

5. Federal Advisory Council minutes, September 17, 1982.

6. Details on markets’ reaction to abandonment of monetarist system are from The Wall Street Journal, October 7, 1982, and the Washington Post and The New York Times, October 8, 1982.

7. President Reagan was quoted in the Washington Post, October 8, 1982.

8. Volcker’s remarks were at the meeting of the Business Council, October 9,

1982.

9. Jude Wanniski interviews (see above).

10. President Reagan’s criticism of the Federal Reserve is quoted in Paul Craig Roberts’s The Supply-Side Revolution, Harvard University Press, 1984.

11. Beryl Sprinkel’s analysis is from “Memorandum for the Cabinet Council on Economic Affairs, Subject: Monetary Policy: The Risks Remain,” March 11,

1983.

12. When an economic theory fails, its apostles usually retreat into a series of excuses, explaining that extraordinary conditions that were unforeseeable were responsible, not the theory itself. Monetarists generally took that line of defense, claiming that the temporary distortions would eventually disappear and the money rule would again be viable. Even Paul Volcker was reluctant to dismiss M-l permanently as a reliable guide to monetary policy.

If M-l is someday restored, however, it will likely be because the Federal Reserve wants a convenient political cover for severe tightening—not because it believes in the theory’s intellectual integrity. The practical disintegration of the monetarist theory was based on three distinct points. First, as Henry Wallich argued in 1979, the dynamic interrelationship between supply, demand and price would always be distorted by holding the supply of money rigid. The other variable—the public’s fluctuating demand for money—would then produce sharp and unpredictable swings in the price, and those swings in interest rates would feed back into economic activity, stimulating or dampening in unintended ways— kicking the economy through the floor and then through the ceiling, as Wallich said.

Second, financial innovation would continuously alter the arbitrary definitions of money that monetarism relied upon for its idea of steady, stable growth. Monetarists claimed that this was a temporary distortion caused by financial deregulation, but the practical history suggested otherwise. Finance was always inventing new ways for people to store their wealth, new hybrid accounts that undermined the old definitions. Money was existential—whatever people thought it was, whatever they were willing to call it. The process of change was not likely to stop in order to accommodate an economic theory.

Finally, starting in late 1981, the basic premise of monetarism—the stable and predictable velocity at which money turned over in circulation—fell apart too. Monetarists conceded as much (long after the fact) but still insisted that velocity would return to normal, that this was an historic aberration. In fact, in turbulent times, velocity usually changed, most dramatically when the central bank was rigidly controlling money, as in the 1920s, and producing sharp interest-rate changes. In other words, monetarism looked like a plausible doctrine—until the Federal Reserve started following it. Then it became unreliable and even destructive.

William McChesney Martin told an interviewer from The New York Times in 1985: “They don’t really know what the money supply is now, even today. They print some figures—I’m not trying to make fun of it—but a lot of it is just almost superstition.” Indeed, the, central allure of Friedman’s theory was always, in large part, spiritual—a simple act of faith that banished complexities. Believe in one thing and one thing only—the sanctity of money—and all the other bewildering variables would fall into line. In hindsight, it is remarkable that so many influential people fell under the spell.

13. Milton Friedman, interview, July 19, 1984.

14. William Poole is quoted from “Memorandum for the Cabinet Council on Economic Affairs, Subject: Controlling Money Growth,” May 16, 1983.

15. Wallich speech before International Conference of Banking Supervisors, September 24, 1981.

16. Karin Lissakers, “Dateline Wall Street: Faustian Finance,” Foreign Policy, summer, 1983.

17. Jesus Silva Herzog was quoted in The Wall Street Journal, August 1, 1983.

18. Argentine episode was reported in the Washington Post, October 5, 1983.

19. Jim Leach, interview, November 14, 1985.

20. James McGrady, interview, August 22, 1985.

21. President Reagan’s remarks are from the President’s Budget Message, January 31, 1983; a speech before the Commonwealth Club, March 4, 1983; and in Klamath Falls, Oregon, March 5, 1983.

22. The “matador” description of Volcker was in a New. York Times editorial, December 31, 1982, and he was compared to St. George by Darrell Delamaide in Debt Shock, Doubleday, 1984.

23. Volcker’s standing in public opinion was cited by Kevin Phillips in The American Political Report, May 6, 1983.

24. The Wall Street Journal's praise was March 14, 1983.

25. Jude Wanniski interviews (see above).

26. The “game of chicken” metaphor is cited in Thomas J. Sargent, “Confrontations Over Deficits,” New York Times, August 12, 1983.

27. The question of what caused the high level of real interest rates led to a continuing debate among economists attempting to define the cause-and-effect linkage between fiscal deficits and tight monetary policy. The Council of Economic Advisers suggested in its 1984 report that a major cause was the business tax cuts enacted by the Reagan Administration, which increased the after-tax return on capital, and, therefore, a higher yield was required for other investments like U.S. bonds to remain competitive. Others attributed the historically high rates to either the huge deficits or the Fed’s tight money policy or, more likely, to a combination of the two. See, for instance, Oliver J. Blanchard and Lawrence H. Summers, “Perspectives on High World Real Interest Rates,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2:1984.

Economist William D. Nordhaus of Yale, commenting on the Blanchard-Summers study, argued that the Federal Reserve was itself principally responsible for imposing the extraordinary rates, particularly in the post-recovery years. This is the conclusion which I share, because it seemed to correspond most plausibly with the political events and with subsequent changes in interest rates. Whenever the Fed acted, the level of real rates promptly changed in response, suggesting that the rates were directly the function of monetary policy, not simply “market forces” imposed by the federal deficits.

Since 1982 ... a different force has been at work—one that might be called “preemptive monetarism” [Nordhaus explained]. During this period, the Federal Reserve has been forced to keep real interest rates high to preempt the actual or prospective effects of the stimulative U.S. fiscal policy. In part, the Federal Reserve seems to have been threatening the Congress with the prospect that real rates would stay high until the deficit was reduced; to some extent, particularly during 1983 and 1984, real interest rates were high because, given the high fiscal deficit, the Federal Reserve’s unemployment and inflation targets could be met only with relatively high interest rates.

28. Real rates on corporate bonds are cited in Henry Kaufman, Interest Rates, the Markets, and the New Financial World, Times Books, 1986.

29. Stephen H. Axilrod, interview, July 25, 1985.

30. Volcker’s “jawboning” of market rates was described in the National Journal, June 11, 1983.

31. Volcker and Lyle Gramley actually articulated these new views on the conduct of monetary policy in 1980 when the economy was in recession but quickly recovered. The same principles guided their thinking in 1983. Volcker was quoted in The Wall Street Journal, May 12, 1980. Gramley’s comment is from a speech, July 17, 1980.

32. Frank Morris’s description of the “mid-course correction” was in a speech, November 16, 1983.

chapter 16: Winners and Losers

1. The Washington Times story on Volcker’s reappointment was April 18, 1983.

2. Senator Garn was quoted in the Washington Post, March 10, 1983.

3. The various business endorsements were listed in the National Journal, June 11, 1983. The survey of financial executives was reported in The Wall Street Journal, June 8, 1983.

4. The President’s and Donald Regan’s remarks on the reappointment were in the Washington Post, June 18, 1983.

5. Donald Regan’s speech to the National Press Club was on June 29, 1983.

6. Alfred Zeller’s fur sales, Wall Street Journal, July 3, 1984.

7. William Hamilton’s polling on interest rates, Wall Street Journal, January 27, 1984.

8. Charles Schultze on supply-side economics, Wall Street Journal, October 10, 1983.

9. The shifting income shares were reported by the Joint Economic Committee, analyzing “After-Tax Money Income Estimates of Households,” U.S. Census, July 8, 1985.

10. The changing patterns of mass consumption were reported by Bruce Steinberg, “The Mass Market Is Splitting Apart,” Fortune, November 28, 1983. A broader description of the economic implications of a shrinking middle class was reported by Robert Kuttner, “The Declining Middle,” The Atlantic, July 1983.

11. Henry Wallich’s warning on debt was from a speech, June 2, 1981.

12. John A. O’Leary, Jr., was quoted in The New York Times, October 11,

1983.

13. Robbin Craven, Carl Redwood, Jr., and Arnie Leibowitz were quoted from May 3-4, 1985, interviews in “An American Dream,” by the author, Rolling Stone, June 20, 1985.

14. Details on labor settlements are from George Ruben, “Modest Labor-Management Bargains Continue in 1984 Despite the Recovery,” Monthly Labor Review, January 1985, and Robert S. Gay, Anne Peters and Maura Shaughnessy, “Union Settlements and Aggregate Wage Behavior in the 1980s,” Federal Reserve Bulletin, December 1984.

15. David Hale’s comment on Republican “public works” was in The Wall Street Journal, January 24, 1985.

16. John Zalusky on strikes, Washington Post, March 7, 1985.

17. Data on “Displaced Workers,” Bureau of Labor Statistics, November 30,

1984.

18. Lewis Goodkin was quoted in The Wall Street Journal, December 7, 1983.

19. Elizabeth Laird, interview, May 28, 1985.

20. Details on mortgage failures are from The New York Times, January 25 and February 18, 1985.

21. Mike Stout was quoted from a May 4, 1985, interview in “An American Dream” (see above).

22. Housing deflation data are from “Housing and Housing Finance in an Era of Inflation and Disinflation,” Western Economic Association, May 1984, and Jane Bryant Quinn, “The Investment Squeeze on Homes,” Newsweek, July 8,

1985.

23. Murray Weidenbaum’s list of “winners and losers” was in “Memorandum for the Cabinet Council on Economic Affairs, Subject: Adjusting to Lower Inflation,” May 14, 1982.

24. Prices of wheat and oil, New York Times, August 21, 1983.

25. The examples of exchange-rate effects on prices are from a speech by Robert O. Anderson, chairman of Atlantic Richfield oil company, “How the Dollar Stole Christmas,” December 9, 1982.

26. Lee Iacocca’s various comments in this chapter on the dollar and Japan are from speeches, June 27, 1983, and June 5, 1986, and testimony before the House Banking Committee, April 28, 1983.

27. Data on trade shifts are from Lee Price, “Trade Problems and Policy from a U.S. Labor Perspective,” in Current U.S. Trade Policy: Analysis, Agenda and Administration, National Bureau of Economic Research, 1986.

28. The description of business lobbying on the dollar is based on a number of White House documents, including: Lee L. Morgan, letter to Cabinet officers, October 20, 1982; Edwin L. Harper, Memorandum to Cabinet, October 22, 1982; and Lawrence A. Kudlow, “Yen-Dollar Relationships and Japanese Financial Market Restrictions,” Memorandum for David A. Stockman, October 26, 1982.

29. Martin Feldstein’s defense of the strong dollar was argued in “Memorandum for the Cabinet Council on Economic Affairs, Subject: Is the Dollar Overvalued?,” April 8, 1983.

30. Complaints by Larry Speakes, Donald Regan, Milton Friedman and Representative Jack Kemp were described in The Wall Street Journal, November 22, December 13 and 14, 1983.

31. Rowland Evans and Robert Novak column, Washington Post, November 11, 1983.

32. Preston Martin, interview, June 2, 1986.

chapter 17: “Morning Again in America”

1. Senator Proxmire’s remarks on campaign pressures on the Fed were at Senate Banking hearing, February 8 and July 25, 1984.

2. Exchange between Senator John Heinz and Paul Volcker occurred during Senate Banking hearing, February 8, 1984.

3. E. F. Hutton’s “Economics: Equity Research,” February 13, 1984.

4. Representative Jack Kemp enumerated his complaints in “Six Questions for Chairman Volcker,” Wall Street Journal, February 7, 1984.

5. Donald Regan’s warnings are from “Monetary Policy, Memorandum for the President,” January 10, 1984.

6. Representative Kemp’s remark is from “Six Questions for Chairman Volcker” (see above).

7. Senator Bentsen’s defense of the Federal Reserve was in “The Fed as Scapegoat,” Washington Post, May 10, 1984.

8. The rightward drift of the Democratic Party’s economic policies derived not so much from a supposed increase in conservative sentiment among voters as from the party’s increasing dependence on conservative business sectors, including investment bankers, for campaign funds. That thesis was persuasively developed by Thomas Ferguson and Joel Rogers in Right Turn: The Decline of the Democrats and the Future of American Politics, Hill and Wang, 1986.

9. Preston Martin’s joke was recounted in The American Banker, August 5, 1985.

10. David Jones, interview, June 27, 1984.

11. Housing and auto statistics are from The Wall Street Journal, February 15 and March 19, 1984. Business spending on new plants and equipment is from the Washington Post, March 13, 1984. Volcker was quoted on potential “bottlenecks” in the Washington Post, March 1, 1984.

12. David Jones’s prediction on the Fed was in the Washington Post, January 14, 1984. E. F. Hutton’s “brakeman” metaphor was in its “Economics: Equity Research” (see above).

13. Reports of the President’s meeting with Volcker and subsequent clarifications by the White House, as well as press commentaries, appeared in the Washington Post on February 16, 22 and 24, 1984, and The Wall Street Journal, February 21, 1984.

14. Robert V. Roosa’s comment is from The New York Times, March 22, 1984.

15. As a practical matter, the Federal Reserve’s capacity-utilization index would never reach 100 percent because, as everyone recognized, the index included idle manufacturing facilities that were old and obsolete and would never be active again. In 1979, for instance, when the economy peaked in the last recovery cycle, manufacturing reached 87 percent of its capacity, according to the index. By contrast, the index fell to 72 percent during the recession of 1982.

What alarmed Gramley, Partee and the others in early 1984 was that the utilization index had risen from 79 percent to nearly 82 percent in only three months. If that rapid acceleration were to continue, they feared the economy would soon reach full capacity and inflation would be reignited by scarce supply and scarce labor. In the actual event, the index never went above 82 percent. It subsided eventually to below 80 percent and remained at that subpar level in ensuing years, another measure of how the economy was held far below its potential.

16. Preston Martin’s “overheated” remark was quoted in the Washington Post, March 14, 1984.

17. The Shearson American Express commentary on the bond market is from its “Economic Research,” April 6, 1984.

18. The public comments on “Fed bashing” are from the Washington Post, May 9-15, and The Wall Street Journal, May 9, 1984.

19. Federal Advisory Council minutes, May 4, 1984.

20; William Isaac’s remarks throughout this chapter are from October 22 and November 14, 1985, interviews.

21. Details on the “run” on Continental Illinois are from the Chicago Tribune, May 27, 1984.

22. Volcker’s acknowledgment of failure to act sooner was made before the Senate Banking Committee, July 25, 1984.

23. Some financial data on the rescue of Continental Illinois are from The Wall Street Journal, May 17 and 18 and July 30, 1984.

24. Volcker’s explanation was made before the Senate Banking Committee, July 25, 1984.

25. An odd intramural controversy developed over the Fed’s enormous emergency loans to Continental Illinois. The Chicago Federal Reserve Bank, which made the loans, had taken $17 billion in assets from Continental as collateral securing its loans, mostly business loan contracts from the bank’s portfolio of assets. However, the Chicago Fed had failed to file liens on these assets at the county courthouse, as required by Illinois law, and directors of the Chicago Fed feared that if Continental closed, they would be in a weak legal position to assert their claims. In particular, they feared they might be held personally liable as directors if the Chicago Federal Reserve Bank suffered losses as a result.

Whether or not this was a genuine risk, the Chicago Fed officers periodically warned regulators in Washington that they were going to proceed to file public liens totaling $17 billion in order to protect themselves. If they had, the event might have reignited the fears of money-market investors and restarted the “run” on Continental. To forestall them, the FDIC chairman was compelled to deliver a formal guarantee to the Chicago Federal Reserve Bank, promising to honor all its claims in the event that Continental failed.

26. Bank closings were reported in the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation 1984 Annual Report.

27. Declining farmland values were calculated by the Federal Reserve, reported in the Washington Post, December 30, 1984.

28. Details on problems at Bank of America and First Chicago are from The Wall Street Journal, December 31, 1984, and the Washington Post, February 23,

1986.

29. Edward A. Taber was quoted in The Wall Street Journal, May 25, 1984.

30. Details on the Open Market Desk’s reactions to the nervousness in banking are drawn from the 1984 Annual Report of the New York Federal Reserve Bank.

31. The bank-profit statistics are from previously cited reports in the Federal Reserve Bulletin, November and December 1985.

32. Governor Martha Seger’s remark on the farm problems was reported by Jude Wanniski in the newsletter from his firm, Polyconomics, March 5, 1985.

33. Karin Lissakers, “Dateline Wall Street: Faustian Finance,” Foreign Policy, Summer 1983.

34. The crisis at Financial Corporation of America, New York Times, August 17, 1984.

35. Richard Brookhiser, The Outside Story: How Democrats and Republicans Reelected Reagan, Doubleday, 1986.

36. Thorstein Veblen, Absentee Ownership and Business Enterprise in Recent Times, B. W. Huebsch, 1923.

37. The press’s failure to focus on the declining economy during the 1984 campaign was especially striking because the initial reports on the decline of real GNP growth were even more drastic than the subsequently revised numbers used in the text. Initially, growth for the third quarter was reported to be 1.6 percent, later revised upward to 2.1 percent. The initial report for the fourth quarter placed growth at 3.9 percent, later revised downward to .6 percent. In either case, political reporters seemed reluctant to question the President’s campaign theme of restored prosperity. A subsequent revision several years later moderated the numbers further. First quarter growth was put at 9.8 percent and the fourth quarter was 1.5 percent.

38. David P. Eastburn explained his “hardship index” in a letter to The Wall Street Journal, March 22, 1983.

39. The 1984 Republican platform, Congressional Quarterly, August 24, 1984.

40. Robert O. Anderson’s comments are from an interview, July 17, 1986, and his Houston speech, October 17, 1984.

41. Corporate relocations of production were described in The Wall Street Journal, April 9, 1985.

42. Gerald Epstein’s commentary was in “The Triple Debt Crisis,” World Policy Journal, Winter 1986.

43. Lee Iacocca’s complaint was in a speech to the American Society of Newspaper Editors, April 10, 1986. His statistics cover 1983-1985. Others have made much higher estimates of the loss of employment caused by the dollar.

44. The lost potential in auto sales was described in Morgan Economic Quarterly, June 1985.

45. Michael Sumichrast, interview, September 14, 1983.

46. The decline of homeownership and housing starts is described in “Home Ownership and Housing Affordability in the United States: 1963-1984,” Joint Center for Housing Studies, MIT-Harvard, 1985 Annual Report.

47. Higher housing costs for young families are described in “The Economic

Future of the Baby Boom,” Frank S. Levy and Richard C. Michel, Joint Economic Committee, December 5, 1985.

48. The Census data on incomes were reported by Thomas B. Edsall, “Republican America,” New York Review of Books, April 24, 1986.

49. The credit expansion for 1984 was reported by the Federal Reserve Board, 1986 Annual Report.

50. Statistics on total domestic debt are from James J. O’Leary, former economist at U.S. Trust, reported in the National Journal, November 16, 1985.

51. Philip Braverman, interview, June 27, 1984.

52. Albert Wojnilower’s commentary is from “Private Credit Demand, Supply and Crunches—How Different Are the 1980s?,” delivered before the American Economic Association, December 28, 1984.

53. Henry Kaufman’s comment on the “safety net” for finance is from an interview in Across the Board, Conference Board, September 1986.

54. Edward Sonnino’s analysis is from “Fed Tightness Boosts Borrowing,” Wall Street Journal, February 21, 1986.

55. As critics from commercial banking would point out, economists from major bond houses were not entirely disinterested in their proposals for new credit controls. If the government imposed supply limits on banking and other forms of short-term credit, more capital would presumably flow to the long-term corporate bonds issued by the investment bankers. The larger social interest would, in fact, be served by that. If long-term capital formation was the highest function of finance and the process that fundamentally determined future prosperity and productivity, then the nation in general would benefit if the government guided wealth in that direction.

In any case, the critique of the bond-market economists who advocated the reregulation of finance could hardly have been motivated by weak profits. During the 1980’s, major brokerages like Salomon Brothers and First Boston enjoyed extraordinary growth and profit.

chapter 18: The Triumph of Money

1. Clifford and Evelyne Burger, Jim Phillips and John Sellers, Jr., interviews, April 4-5, 1985. See also “A Farewell to Farming,” by Hank Klibanoff, Philadelphia Inquirer Magazine, March 31, 1985.

2. “There must be losers” is from E. F. Hutton’s Investment Strategy, February 1986. The deflation losers included the Hunt brothers of Texas, who in August 1986 were compelled to file for bankruptcy relief for Placid Oil Company, the center of the family’s wealth.

3. Commodity prices are from The Wall Street Journal, April 28 and August 19, 1986, and the annual commodity indexes of the Economist, Feburary 8, 1986.

4. Lester V. Chandler, Benjamin Strong, Central Banker, Brookings Institution, 1958.

5. Joseph Coyne, public affairs director for the Federal Reserve Board, has denied that Volcker made such a comment to the farm-state legislators. Three state legislators attest that they heard Volcker say it, Senators Sandra Scofield and Harry B. Chronister of Nebraska and Representative Norwood Creason of Missouri, letters to The Wall Street Journal, October 24 and 27, 1986. Federal Reserve officials often disclaimed responsibility in public for ill consequences they joked about in private. At Paul Volcker’s retirement banquet in July 1987, a senior staff official from Oklahoma jokingly awarded the chairman a plaque in recognition that Volcker had reduced his home state to the status of a developing country.

6. Fortune 500 summary is from Fortune, April 28, 1986.

7. Martha Seger’s complaints are in an interview with Nina Easton, The American Banker, February 3, 1986.

8. The Shearson Lehman Bond Index was cited in The Wall Street Journal, May 10, 1986.

9. Beryl Sprinkel’s lament was quoted in The New York Times, July 3, 1986. The decline of money velocity in the 1980s was astutely explained by independent economic forecaster A. Gary Shilling in The Wall Street Journal, May 20, 1986. Shilling demonstrated that the seesaw pattern of velocity in the 1980s, decreasing and increasing and upsetting monetarist calculations, resembled experience in the 1920s when disinflation also changed the money-holding habits of individuals and businesses. Velocity followed a predictable curve of steady increase only in the decades after World War II, but that fact hardly helped the monetarist theory since that was also the era of inflation. The historical experience charted by Shilling suggested that monetarism’s claims about the stable meaning of money were always destabilized in times of disinflation or deflation. The theory, therefore, could not be dependable as the central bank’s permanent operating rule unless the central bank also was prepared to allow permanent inflation.

10. Milton Friedman, interview, July 19, 1984.

11. George P. Brockway, economics columnist in The New Leader, offered his commentary on the supply disorders in The New York Times, November 24, 1985. Edward Dennison, an economist from the Brookings Institution, estimated that the United States had “the largest reserve of unused production capacity since the thirties.” While no reliable measure existed for worldwide supply capacity, other leading industrial nations suffered from similar problems in the 1980s. West Germany’s capacity utilization declined from 86 to 82.8 percent. Canada’s fell from 86 to 76 percent. Japan’s utilization rate, calculated on a different base, declined from 91.6 to 85 percent. See the annual report of the Joint Economic Committee, February 1986.

12. Marriner Eccles’s analysis is from Economic Balance and a Balanced Budget, Da Capo Press, 1973, and Beckoning Frontiers, edited by Sidney Hyman, Alfred A. Knopf, 1951.

13. Robert F. Barbera, chief economist of E. F. Hutton, was quoted in The New York Times, February 28, 1986.

14. Marriner Eccles, Beckoning Frontiers (see above).

15. Kenneth E. Boulding discussed the “pathological features” of interest rates in “Puzzles over Distribution,” Challenge, November-December 1985.

16. A Federal Reserve Board spokesman denied that the chairman had been rebuffed by the Board of Governors in his attempts to raise the Discount rate, but this account was confirmed by Governor Martha Seger. Except for Business Week and columnists Evans and Novak, the press seemed unaware that any conflict had occurred.





ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


My indebtedness to Linda Furry Greider is far greater than the usual thanks an author extends to a spouse for personal support and patience. Through nearly five years, her questions and observations consistently instructed me to see the subject whole—to think in the human dimensions that are much larger than economics. In particular, she encouraged me to examine the psychological subtexts that exist beneath both politics and economics, and to anchor the abstractions of financial economics in the real experiences of real people.

In the reporting for this book, I was fortunate to have as a research assistant a brilliant young reporter, Marilyn Marks, who took a year’s leave from her graduate studies to work with me. Her intellectual curiosity and reporter’s tenacity were invaluable. She also served as a thoughtful critic of my analysis.

I am of course indebted to Paul Volcker and the other Federal Reserve governors and Reserve Bank presidents who granted me interviews, but I also wish to thank the scores of Federal Reserve System employees, past and present, who helped me to understand the institution. I will mention only a few of them: James H. Oltman, general counsel of the New York Federal Reserve Bank; John Paulus of Morgan Stanley; Daniel Brill, the retired research director; Merritt Sherman, retired secretary to the Board of Governors, and Robert A. Johnson, a staff economist in Washington. Rob Johnson, in particular, was a wonderful teacher and guide through the technical intricacies of monetary economics. I am also grateful to Joseph R. Coyne, public affairs director of the Federal Reserve Board, and Peter H. Bakstan-sky, who holds the same position at the New York Federal Reserve Bank, for their generous assistance.

The manuscript benefitted from the critical scrutiny of David Smith, A. Thomas Ferguson and Robert A. Johnson, each of whom raised valuable questions about history, politics and economics.

Certain friends were especially important in the advice and encouragement they offered along the way. One was my agent, Lynn Nesbit. Another was Bob Woodward of The Washington Post. And I will be forever grateful to Jann Wenner, the editor of Rolling Stone, who generously indulged my pursuit of this project.

At Simon & Schuster, I am, most of all, thankful for a brilliant editor, Alice Mayhew, who instantly understood all the reasons why this was an important subject and encouraged me to explore it in the fullest terms. I would also like to thank John Cox, who expertly helped to shape a very long manuscript; Henry Ferris, who supervised production; and Patricia Miller, who provided superb copy editing. In Washington, Katherine Dunbar ably assisted in checking facts.

Finally, on the deepest level, I am indebted to many teachers, formal and informal, who over the years instructed me on how to look at things. I mention especially the late John William Ward, an historian who at Princeton University many years ago taught that history is not a separate subject from politics and economics, religion and literature and social psychology, but that all are pieces from the same fabric. My most important teachers, of course, have been my parents, Harold W. Greider and Gladys McClure Greider, who taught that curiosity, optimism and faith in the democratic ideal are themselves endlessly enriching qualities.

Washington, D.C.

August 15, 1987





FLAPS AND COVER


ABOUT THE AUTHOR


William Greider writes about national affairs for Rolling Stone. He was formerly assistant managing editor for The Washington Post. Greider is author of The Education of David Stockman and Other Americans. He lives in Washington, D.C.

On October 19, 1987, Americans witnessed a traumatic event beyond the living experience of most citizens. The stock market in Wall Street collapsed, swiftly followed by other major exchanges around the world. Transient opinions offered by media commentators failed to explain the deeper story that led up to this bewildering event. This book does. It is a chronicle of the unseen political struggles that led to financial crisis. It is the inside story of how the Federal Reserve, remote and mysterious to most Americans, actually ran things in the 1980s.

For 75 years, the awesome powers of the Federal Reserve have been shielded from scrutiny by the Fed’s deliberate mystique and official secrecy. Now, in this landmark book, the veil is pulled aside. For the first time, the public is taken inside the governing institution that, in some ways, is more secretive than the CIA and more powerful than the President or Congress. Basing his work on firsthand reporting with the major players, an eminent reporter provides an intimate, well-rounded portrait of how the central bank actually works—independently setting the course for the American economy and the world’s.

The central character is Paul Volcker, a spartan technocrat of formidable intelligence who, as Federal Reserve chairman, literally overpowers political adversaries with his strong will—even the President. Volcker and his fellow governors gather at the long table in the privacy of the Fed’s magnificent boardroom to decide the largest questions for the nation, and sometimes whether to ignore or defy the elected government in the White House and Congress.

The story opens in 1979 when a gravely weakened President, Jimmy Carter, reluctantly appoints Paul Volcker as Fed chairman. Volcker and his colleagues swiftly take control from Carter and proceed to engineer the wrenching economic changes of the 1980s—a transformation that enhanced or damaged the fortunes of virtually every American enterprise, every citizen. Volcker’s domination of government economic policy produces great triumphs and also grave errors. Above all, it is Paul Volcker who steers the nation’s economic destiny through the Reagan era—not Ronald Reagan.

The fundamental disorders that have developed in the American economy were made in Washington as Volcker and Reagan pursued contradictory goals. The President wanted to stimulate the economy with huge tax cuts—“reawaken the sleeping giant”—but Volcker intended to sedate it with tight money and high interest rates. The Fed chairman won. The consequences were severe.

Secrets of the Temple also explains the larger context in which the Federal Reserve exists—why the Fed was created as “the crucial anomaly at the core of representative democracy” and why the politicians of both parties acquiesce to the Federal Reserve’s power.



About the Author

William Greider is the author of The Education of David Stockman and Other Americans, a controversial account of how fiscal policy in the Reagan Administration produced the unprecedented budget deficits. In this narrative, he examines the other side of the economic equation—the government’s management of monetary policy. Greider writes about politics for Rolling Stone. He is a former assistant managing editor for national affairs at The Washington Post.

Jacket design by Robert Anthony

Jacket photograph by Dennis Brack/Black Star

Author photograph by Lisa Berg

Printed in U. S. A. Copyright © 1988 Simon & Schuster Inc.





BACK COVER


Praise for Secrets of the Temple

“This book is startling and revelatory as well as probing and incisive. It is not only a major journalistic achievement but a major public service, for it is an immensely valuable addition to our understanding of the hidden forces that shape our lives.”

—Robert A. Caro

“I expect this book to shake up Washington and probably Wall Street too. Bill Greider’s reporting goes right to the bone and marrow of American politics—how the government really decides the largest economic questions and whose influence really counts. This book may also be the public’s best chance to understand an enormously complex subject—money—because Greider’s narrative makes it lucid and even exciting.” —David A. Stockman

“William Greider has written two books in one. One of them is a fascinating account of Paul Volcker’s extraordinary management of the Federal Reserve Board, and through the Fed, of the American economy. The second is the story of the tension between money power and people power, between capitalism and democracy, that is a largely neglected but crucially important theme of our history. I don’t know of any book that has made so ambitious an effort and succeeded so brilliantly.”

—Robert L. Heilbroner

“It is often noted that much of American politics is really about economics. In this masterly look at the Federal Reserve System, William Greider drops the other shoe and argues that much of what passes for economic policy is really about politics. This is a book that should be read and talked about from one end of the country to the other.” —Senator Edward M. Kennedy





