2 IN THE TEMPLE


When the Federal Reserve System’s new building on Constitution Avenue was completed in 1937, the clean, classical exterior of white marble looked much like the neighboring federal buildings going up in the New Deal era. The design conveyed “dignity and permanence,” as the architects intended, without the decorative tricks or monumental scale that made older government buildings in Washington seem pretentious or forbidding. An American eagle in white marble, perched over huge bronze doors, looked out at the green spaces of Washington’s Mall, just east of the Lincoln Memorial. The doorway led to a lobby displaying portraits of Woodrow Wilson, the Fed’s founding President, and Senator Carter Glass of Virginia, who shepherded the Federal Reserve Act through Congress in 1913. The lobby’s ceiling was decorated with a plaster relief of Greek coins surrounding the goddess Cybele, symbol of abundance and stability. The entrance was imposing but impractical. Except for rare ceremonial occasions, the bronze doors remained closed. Everyone, from clerks to governors, entered the Fed through the back door on the C Street side of the building.1

When the building was still new, Representative Wright Patman of Texas, last of the genuine Populists to serve in Congress, offered a mischievous suggestion. Patman was a brilliant eccentric, self-taught and stubbornly independent in his views, and he devoted nearly fifty years in Congress to methodically assaulting the Federal Reserve System and its privileged powers. This building, Patman observed at a House hearing in 1939, did not actually belong to the federal government. It belonged to the twelve Reserve Banks of the Federal Reserve System—and the twelve Reserve Banks were owned and controlled by private commercial banks, which held stock in the Reserve Banks as a condition of membership in the System. Therefore, the congressman reasoned, the Fed’s headquarters was not tax-exempt like other public buildings. It should be subject to local property taxes, like any other private enterprise.

Inspired by Patman’s remarks, the District of Columbia tax collector sent a bill for property taxes to the Federal Reserve’s Board of Governors. The Fed refused to pay. The board’s lawyers patiently tried to explain the complicated institution created by Woodrow Wilson’s legislative compromise, an institution that, they insisted, was a part of the government. The lawyers cited the original legislative history of 1913 and an Attorney General’s opinion issued the following year and subsequent federal court decisions, all of which confirmed this. The Federal Reserve was an “independent department” of government.

The D.C. tax collector was not convinced. After all, the Board of Governors had purchased the land from the federal government in 1935 for $750,000 and the Treasury Department had signed over the deed, relinquishing “all the right title and interest of the United States of America.” If the Fed was part of government, why would the federal government sell real estate to itself? In December 1941, four days before Pearl Harbor, the District of Columbia government published a notice of delinquent taxes and scheduled a public auction. It would sell the Federal Reserve’s marble temple to the highest bidder.

The auction was postponed several times and never occurred, but it took three years of legal wrangling before the Board of Governors could convince the local government that the Federal Reserve System, despite its peculiar structure, was indeed part of the federal government. In the end, each of the twelve Reserve Banks was compelled to execute a quitclaim deed, attesting that they did not own the building on Constitution Avenue, that the U.S. government owned it.2

Nevertheless, the Federal Reserve System enjoyed the ambiguity over its status and exploited it. Philip E. Coldwell, who served nearly thirty years in the System, as president of the Dallas Reserve Bank and on the Board of Governors, observed: “To some extent, the Federal Reserve considers itself government. Other times, when it serves, it considers itself not government.”

Wright Patman never relented. Twenty-five years later, on the floor of the House of Representatives, he declared: “A slight acquaintance with American constitutional theory and practice demonstrates that, constitutionally, the Federal Reserve is a pretty queer duck.” He was correct in that. The Federal Reserve System was an odd arrangement, a unique marriage of public supervision and private interests, deliberately set apart from the elected government, though still part of it. The Fed enjoyed privileges extended to no other agency in Washington —it raised its own revenue, drafted its own operating budget and submitted neither to Congress for approval. At the top were the seven governors of the Federal Reserve Board, appointed by the President to fourteen-year terms and confirmed by the Senate. But the seven governors shared power with the presidents of the twelve Reserve Banks, each serving the private banks in its region, from Boston to Atlanta, Dallas to San Francisco. The Reserve Bank presidents were not appointed in Washington, but were elected by each district’s board of directors. Six of the nine directors in each case were, in turn, elected themselves by the commercial banks, the “member banks” of the Federal Reserve System. When the Fed decided the core questions of regulating money supply, its debate and votes were conducted in a hybrid committee that combined the two levels, known as the Federal Open Market Committee. In FOMC decisions, the governors had seven votes and Reserve Bank presidents had five votes, rotated annually among the districts. Only the president of the New York Fed, more important than all the others, did not have to share; he voted at all meetings. Thus, critics complained, the nation’s money regulation was decided in part by representatives of private interests—the banks.3

To further complicate and darken the picture, the commercial banks held stock shares in each of the twelve Federal Reserve Banks, which misled many into assuming that the Federal Reserve System was “privately owned.” In fact, the stock shares were a vestigial feature of System membership that confused and excited Populist critics, but had virtually no practical meaning. The Federal Reserve System was government, including the twelve Federal Reserve Banks, not a private entity. Commercial bankers did enjoy preferred access and influence at the Fed, but the internal power relationship gave the Board of Governors, appointed by Washington, more authority than the presidents of the twelve Federal Reserve Banks. When a regional board of directors selected its new president, the chairman at the Fed’s home office could veto the choice.

The American arrangement was quite different from those of the central banks in most other industrial nations, where the appendage of regional reserve banks did not exist. The crucial difference, however, was that other central banks, even the prototypical Bank of England, were democratized in a way the Fed was not. They all operated on the same basic principles of finance, but other central bankers took their orders directly from elected politicians. When the Bank of England wished to raise interest rates, it could not move without approval from the Prime Minister’s Cabinet. The same subservient relationship applied in Japan, France and Italy. The one exception was the Bundesbank in West Germany, whose political independence resembled the Federal Reserve’s and for good reason. In the reconstruction following World War II, Germany’s new central bank was patterned on the American model.

Patman’s crusade failed. In a lifetime of tenacious lobbying for reform, the Texas congressman could never persuade a majority in Congress to change the Fed in any way. Year after year, as chairman of the House Banking Committee, Patman held meticulous hearings and introduced reform legislation to make the Fed more democratic and less subject to the influence of major banks. Shorten the terms of the governors so a single President would have more appointments and, thus, more influence. Remove the Reserve Bank presidents from the Federal Open Market Committee so that only public officials who were nominated by the Chief Executive and confirmed by Congress would decide monetary policy for the nation. Force the Fed to open its books for independent audits by Congress. Subject the Fed’s operating budgets to regular congressional scrutiny in the appropriations process, like any other federal agency. Above all, eliminate the privileged status of the private bankers. “A bunch of money hucksters,” Patman called them. The Fed, he said, constituted “a dictatorship on money matters by a bankers’ club.” None of his legislation was enacted.

Long after Patman died in the mid-1970s, others continued to raise his complaints. The same reform bills were introduced year after year in Congress, with both liberal and conservative sponsors. All failed to pass, with the single exception of the congressional audit of Fed books, authorized in 1978. Nearly every year, some group somewhere in America filed new lawsuits against the Fed, attacking its secrecy or challenging its legality. None of these lawsuits succeeded.

Neither the hot Populist rhetoric nor careful scholarly critiques made any difference. For all its peculiar features, the Federal Reserve System was remarkably stable among America’s political institutions. Over seventy years, its basic design probably changed less than any other important operating arm of the federal government, from the Pentagon to the Postal Service. Most major federal agencies and departments have undergone repeated reorganizations and restructuring, but the Federal Reserve System was “reformed” only once— during the 1930s when control over its decision making was centralized in the Board of Governors in Washington, just as other New Deal reforms consolidated power in the national capital. Regardless of its peculiarities, the Fed’s enduring stability as a political institution was evidence that it somehow “worked”—that is, the Federal Reserve seemed to provide what the American system wanted. Otherwise, surely, it would have been changed.

Yet the suspicion and mystery endured too. From the beginning, the Federal Reserve was implicated in nativist conspiracy theories. Homespun tracts and polemical books described it as the secret nexus for sinister forces in the world. The Fed was agent for the “Powers,” usually identified as the “International Bankers” and sometimes the “Illuminati” or the “Zionist Conspiracy,” echoing the febrile anti-Semitism associated with money since medieval Christianity. The Fed, it was said, was the operating center for a mysterious network of unseen but awesomely powerful people who were manipulating the society for their own purposes—world dominion. In the 1970s, as inflation accelerated, the dark theories about the Fed thrived anew, disseminated in scores of homemade newsletters and privately published books. When Paul Volcker was confirmed by the Senate Banking Committee in August 1979, a citizens’ group from Virginia had testified against him, noting his connections with the “top secret” Bilderberg Conference, David Rockefeller’s Chase Manhattan Bank, the Council on Foreign Relations and the Trilateral Commission—all of them staples in the popular theories of “one world” conspiracy.4

The conspiracy theories were inconsequential in political terms, but in cultural terms, most relevant. The theories contained a revealing message—an expression of spiritual anxiety. Like all conspiracy theories, the ones aimed at the Fed were confused attempts to confront larger mysteries of life, to explain the awesome powers that were shielded from the scrutiny of ordinary mortals yet seemed to govern their lives, like the temple incantations of ancient priests who interpreted divine messages and decreed the course of social destiny. In a twisted sense, belief in a grand conspiracy was an act of religious deference, an acknowledgment by people that someone or something held distant and unexplainable power over them. The believers collected scattered facts and stitched them together to construct a cosmology that explained good and evil, and, like most cosmologies, this one seemed logical to believers and utterly bizarre to everyone else. Somewhere, in a hidden place, there were mortal men who conspired to rule over all—to usurp powers that belonged only to God.

The supposed sacrilege of men who created money was a constant theme in the most virulent tracts attacking the Fed. One of them, The Federal Reserve Hoax, written in the early 1960s by Wickliffe B. Yennard, Sr., explained, for instance, a dizzying series of historical connections between money and democracy and Christian faith, the death of Christ, the assassination of Lincoln, and the Federal Open Market Committee:

When our Lord and Master defied them by upsetting the tables and casting the money changers from His temple with a whip, He knew full well that within a week He would be nailed to a cross on Calvary. . . . Abraham Lincoln, whose rash defiance [of bankers] cost him his life, saved this country billions in interest, because the money was not issued against debt as is that issued by the Federal Reserve System. . . . Since the Babylonian Captivity, there has existed a determined behind-the-scenes, under-the-table, atheistic, satanic, anti-Christian force—worshippers of Mammon—whose underlying purpose is World Control through the Control of Money. . . . This book is aimed at the Sanhedrin of today—the 12 men who control this country from behind the scenes.5

To modern minds, it seemed bizarre to think of the Federal Reserve as a religious institution. Yet the conspiracy theorists, in their own demented way, were on to something real and significant. Economics was the essence of scientific rationalism; the Fed’s analytical techniques were the opposite of metaphysical speculation. But the Federal Reserve did also function in the realm of religion. Its mysterious powers of money creation, inherited from priestly forebears, shielded a complex bundle of social and psychological meanings. With its own form of secret incantation, the Federal Reserve presided over awesome social ritual, transactions so powerful and frightening they seemed to lie beyond common understanding.

Feverish polemics that portrayed the Fed as the “Sanhedrin of today” were ludicrous in their particulars, but they were based on an ancient cultural reality about money that was still valid in the age of enlightenment and computers. Above all, money was a function of faith. It required an implicit and universal social consent that was indeed mysterious. To create money and use it, each one must believe and everyone must believe. Only then did worthless pieces of paper take on value. When a society lost faith in money, it was implicitly losing faith in itself. In the advanced economies of Western capitalist nations, this fundamental social bond had been managed for several centuries by ordinary mortals, working in institutions devoid of religious trappings (though religion still exercised direct influence over money in some less-advanced cultures). The money process, nonetheless, still required a deep, unacknowledged act of faith, so mysterious that it could easily be confused with divine powers.

“It is a truism that public confidence is important to banks,” an editorial in The Wall Street Journal observed. “That’s why early Hebrews did their banking in temples and the later Americans and Europeans built banks that looked like temples.”6 Officials of the Federal Reserve were themselves the ultimate rationalists—economists who analyzed numbers, constructed scientific theories to explain economic behavior and tested the theories against reality—yet they too unconsciously invoked the sacred aura of their institution. Federal Reserve governors spoke enthusiastically about “the mystique of central banking,” without being able to explain it very succinctly. A former officer of the Federal Reserve Board, describing the confidential fraternity that economists entered into when they joined the Fed staff, called it “taking the veil,” the expression that describes nuns entering a convent. A chairman of the House Banking Committee sometimes referred derisively to the Fed’s senior economists as “the monks.”7 Richard Syron, a vice president of the Boston Fed who served for a time as special assistant to Volcker, suggested that the institutional temperament and structure of the Federal Reserve System most resembled the Catholic Church, in which he had been raised.

The System is just like the Church. That’s probably why I feel so comfortable with it. It’s got a pope, the chairman; and a college of cardinals, the governors and bank presidents; and a curia, the senior staff. The equivalent of the laity is the commercial banks. If you’re a naughty parishioner in the Catholic Church, you come to confession. In this system, if you’re naughty, you come to the Discount window for a loan. We even have different orders of religious thought like Jesuits and Franciscans and Dominicans only we call them pragmatists and monetarists and neo-Keynesians.

The institution’s official secrecy naturally enhanced the mystique. The Federal Open Market Committee met to deliberate on the money supply eight to ten times a year, but its decisions were made in secrecy. Only six or eight weeks later, after the FOMC had held its next meeting, would the Fed release a brief report on what the previous meeting had decided. Internal reports and memos, the economic analysis that supported the decisions, were kept confidential for five years. A full transcript of the committee deliberations was never available, because it was no longer kept. The FOMC used to make a transcript of its deliberations available to the public after the five-year waiting period, but even that historical record was discontinued in the mid-1970s. When Congress was enacting the Freedom of Information Act, Federal Reserve Chairman Arthur Burns decided to abolish the full transcript, lest litigation force it into public view prematurely and embarrass Fed officials. No other agency of government, not even the Central Intelligence Agency, enjoyed such privacy.

The Fed would explain itself, but only up to a point and long after the fact. Ostensibly, this was meant to avoid market manipulations and “insider trading” on the Fed’s own decisions, but it also provided political cover. The secrecy spawned an infantile anger among the Fed’s critics, even from some distinguished scholars whose commentaries on Fed performance frequently seemed harsh and petulant. Not knowing was a form of impotence, and the critics’ anger often sounded like the frustrated tantrums of a small child who has been excluded from the family secrets. What is going on behind the closed door? Father does not answer. It must be something important. Mother will not tell. The secret behind the bronze doors was not, of course, sex, but nearly as mysterious.

The anti-Fed polemics liked to quote Henry Ford, Sr., on the mysteries of money and the Federal Reserve: “It is well enough that the people of the nation do not understand our banking and monetary system for, if they did, I believe there would be a revolution before tomorrow morning.”8

The American public, not unlike its political leaders, depended on familiar cliches for its limited understanding of money. The Federal Reserve controls the money supply. The Fed sets interest rates. When the government spends too much money, the Fed turns on the printing press and then we have inflation. All these crude generalities were either mistaken or too simplistic to describe the reality, and unless one was willing to move beyond them, it was impossible to understand the awesome powers of the Federal Reserve or its frailties.

The public’s confusion over money and its ignorance of money politics were heightened by the scientific pretensions of economics. Average citizens simply could not understand the language, and most economists made no effort to translate for them. The dominant mode of modern economic analysis mimicked the methods of Newtonian physics by presuming that economic behavior followed its own self-contained logic, rules and patterns as capable of replication as the natural laws that physicists discovered in the physical world. Most economists, regardless of their particular ideological biases, dwelt rigidly within that narrow definition of their discipline. They cloaked their observations in dense, neutral-sounding terminology that was opaque to nonscientists. The neutral language masked the political content of economics and the social rituals of capitalism—as if all economic players were simple molecules destined to behave according to the same natural order, regardless of their political values or wealth. All economic decisions were made not to reward one group or to punish another but simply to advance the universal objective of “sound economics.” John Kenneth Galbraith, an economist with a more supple understanding of human society, drolly observed: “What is called sound economics is very often what mirrors the needs of the respectably affluent.”9

Economics also tried to ignore the psychological impulses that lay beneath all human behavior. Individually or in large groups, people did sometimes defy the tangible dictates of supply and demand. They behaved in ways that seemed perverse to economics, driven by their own beliefs or emotions, nonquantifiable fears or hopes that existed only in their heads, not in economic data from the marketplace. Every fishmonger in Washington, D.C., for instance, understood the psychology of bluefish. If the price of bluefish was up at $2.20 per pound, the Chesapeake Bay fishermen would likely bring in larger catches. That naturally drove down the price, and as it fell, customers bought more and more bluefish. Then a strange thing happened: when the price fell below $1 a pound, people stopped buying bluefish, even though it was plentiful. Bluefish had become a “cheap” fish, unfit for their dinner table. When the price went up, they started buying again. In larger and much more complicated ways, financial markets were also driven by the nonquantifiable beliefs and emotions.

The ultimate test of soundness for any science was the ability of its rules and theories to predict outcomes, and by that standard, economics was a crude and underdeveloped discipline. When its models failed, as they often did, economists grudgingly acknowledged that political impulses or human psychology had somehow disrupted the equations. These events were usually dismissed as “random shocks” —war or political intervention or social upheavals—that need not be explained since they were nonrecurring aberrations. War and politics were not abnormal events in human society, only in economics. The reigning scientific perspective of economists, in addition to being severely limited in scope, was also outdated intellectually. Economics mimicked physics, but twentieth-century physicists had moved beyond the clockwork laws of Newton to the relativity of Einstein, a vastly richer and more supple conception of reality. Economists seemed unable to follow.

The public confusion about money began at the most elementary level—with the word itself. When academic economists or monetary experts at the Federal Reserve talked about money, they meant something specific and different from what most Americans understood. Money simply meant wealth in the loose colloquial that most people used. “My money is in stocks and bonds.” “His money is in real estate.”

To economists, money was only what could be used immediately to buy things—that is, the cash in one’s pocket, coins and bills, or the demand deposit in a checking account at the bank. When economists talked about the “money supply,” or the principal monetary aggregate known as M-l, they meant only the money that could be spent right away—the gross sum of all the currency and demand deposits held by every consumer and business in the country. In August 1979, the spending money called M-l totaled only $362 billion for the entire U.S. economy. That hardly seemed adequate to sustain a Gross National Product of $2.4 trillion, the annual total of goods and services produced in America. The modest supply of money was adequate, however, because, in the course of a year, this money would turn over many times, as people exchanged it. A factory worker cashes his paycheck and buys groceries. The supermarket pays the wholesaler for produce and the wholesaler buys a new car. The auto dealer pays his employees. The same $362 billion would slosh in and out of many pockets, many bank accounts, turning over more than six times during the year.

Most of the spending money known as M-l existed as checking-account deposits, about three-fourths of it, and the rest as currency. The proportions did not matter, since the two were interchangeable. If the public for some reason wanted to hold more of its money in hard cash, the Bureau of Engraving printed more bills and the Federal Reserve distributed the currency through the banking system, but the printing itself did not create new money—since the cash was simply substituted for the existing deposits in checking accounts.

If the same factory worker put part of his wages in a savings account at his bank or the neighborhood savings and loan, he would still regard his money as money, but monetary economists would treat it differently. Unlike bank checking accounts, a savings account paid him interest on his money. But it was no longer so easy for him to spend it immediately. He would most likely have to withdraw funds from his savings account, deposit the money in his checking account at the bank, then write a check at the store. Thus, the money moved more slowly into economic transactions—less liquid in the hydraulics of the economy. Economists, therefore, counted it in a second category, a broader monetary aggregate known as M-2. M-2 included all of the small savings accounts and time deposits at banks, credit unions or S & L’s plus whatever people had invested in money-market mutual funds. With M-l added in, M-2 totaled about $1.5 trillion.

Following the same distinctions, M-3 was a still larger category of money—larger and less liquid than the other two. It added such large-denomination financial instruments as $100,000 certificates of deposit that only corporations, financial institutions or wealthy investors could afford to hold, usually for a specified time period like three months or six months. They could withdraw their money eventually, but it was not readily available for spending. The broader M-3 aggregate—which included M-l and M-2—totaled about $1.7 trillion. (A final measure of money, known as L, for total liquidity, attempted to count all the financial assets that could be sold and converted into spending money —Treasury bills, commercial paper, U.S. savings bonds and a few others—though perhaps at a penalty if market prices were down. L totaled a little more than $2.1 trillion.10

The three main blends of money described, in a sense, the fluid that the Federal Reserve attempted to regulate inside the tanks and plumbing of the financial system. Each blend of money had a different viscosity, like three different grades of oil. The spending money called M-l was light and freely flowing. M-2 and M-3 were more dense and flowed more slowly, like heavier oils that settled to the bottom of a tank. Any businessman or family could shift its money from one blend to another, simply by moving it from one kind of liquid asset to another, and this interaction between the three monetary aggregates was under way constantly in millions of financial transactions. These shifts did not alter the overall size of the money supply, but they were an important element in the money dynamics that the Federal Reserve monitored, a source of continuing uncertainty and occasional error.

America’s money, however, did not stop at the national borders. “Our money is the world’s money,” as Paul Volcker has said. The dollar was the dominant currency of world trade so its value affected global transactions far beyond U.S. commerce. If Saudi Arabia sold oil to Latin America, the transaction was in dollars; if the dollar was declining in international exchange, the Arabs lost real income. “Fundamentally, what disturbs Peoria disturbs Zurich,” Volcker argued. In addition, the U.S. financial system also functioned in a “51st state,” as one analyst called it—the Eurodollar market. A huge pool of expatriate dollars, at first built up over the postwar decades by the trading and investment of U.S. multinational corporations, existed offshore for lending and borrowing. U.S. banks alone had assets of more than $400 billion in overseas offices—essentially unregulated. Technically, it was not part of the domestic money supply, but every day the major banks, corporations and investors shifted back and forth between the two, seeking the highest rate of return or the cheapest loan. The dollar in Peoria, therefore, reacted eventually to the dollar in Zurich and vice versa.

The economists’ definition of “moneyness” was not the heart of public confusion, however. The fundamental source of mystery—the process that so defied common intuition that it did not seem quite believable—was the creation of money. For centuries, as the outlines of modern banking developed, prudent men had condemned its money-creating powers as dangerous and immoral, destined to collapse someday and bring society down with it. The anti-Fed polemics railed at the Board of Governors and the secret proceedings of the FOMC, but what really disturbed the authors was the way in which money was created. For ordinary citizens, who had never before contemplated the matter, the experience could be slightly dizzying. It did sound like magic.

New money was created not only by the Federal Reserve but also by private commercial banks. They did it by new lending, by expanding the outstanding loans on their books. Routinely, a bank borrowed money from one group, the depositors, and lent it to someone else, the borrowers, a straightforward function as intermediary. But, if that was all that occurred, then credit would be frozen in size, unable to expand with new economic growth. On the margins, therefore, bankers expanded their lending on their own and the overall pool of credit grew —and the bank credit turned into money.

A bank officer authorizes a $100,000 loan to a small-business man —a judgment that the businessman’s future earnings will be sufficient to repay the loan, that his enterprise would create real value in the future, which would justify the risk and the creation of the additional money. Ordinarily the banker would not hand over $100,000 in dollar bills. He would simply write a check or, more likely, enter a credit in the businessman’s bank account for $100,000. Either way, money has been created by the simple entry in a ledger. Implausible as that might seem, it was a reality that everyone would accept, even if they were unaware of its audacity. The businessman would go out and spend the money, writing checks on his new account, and everyone would honor their value. The creation of new money, thus, was really based on bank-created debt. This concept is what baffled and outraged so many critics of the money system. Money ought to be “real,” they insisted. It should be based on something tangible from the past, accumulated wealth like gold, not on a banker’s hunch about the future.

How could such a system possibly work? Why didn’t it collapse and produce social disaster? The short, simple explanation was: trust. People trusted the banks (and, by extension, the Federal Reserve). They believed, perhaps not even knowing the actual mechanics, that bankers would use this magic prudently. Banks would make sound loans that would be repaid, and they would always keep enough money on hand so that any individual depositor could always withdraw his when he needed it.

If enough loans went bad and enough people became distrustful, they all went to the bank at once to withdraw their money and discovered that actually the bank didn’t have enough. A “run on the bank” usually ended in failure and padlocked doors, but the legendary bank panics of history were largely unknown to modern Americans; nothing like that had happened in America in nearly fifty years.

This was the original purpose for which the Federal Reserve was created in 1913—to protect the banking system from periodic liquidity crises, temporary shortages of money that led to failure. Through the Discount window, the Fed provided short-term loans to banks that were temporarily strained, helping them through the tight spots. With one spectacular exception, the Crash of 1929 and the banking panic that closed nearly half of the banks in America, the Fed’s protection was extraordinarily successful.

Banks, large and small, were the most secure business enterprises in America, sheltered by the government from failure like no other sector of the economy. Year after year, no more than a handful of the nation’s fourteen thousand banks failed, usually six or eight a year and sometimes none. In 1979, ten banks would be forced to close, all of them quite small and marginal. This compared to 1,165 mining and manufacturing companies that failed, 908 wholesale goods suppliers, 3,183 retail stores, 1,378 construction companies. Banking was safe and profitable, nearly fail-proof.12

Bankers, however, could be dangerous. They were human, after all. Left to their own impulses, they might be tempted to expand their loans and create new money infinitely—collecting more and more interest income, the main source of bank profits, until eventually the system collapsed of its own greed. They were restrained from doing this by the Federal Reserve.

The ultimate purpose of the central bank was to control the society’s overall expansion of debt—to decide, in effect, what level of hopes and promises the future could reasonably fulfill. If new credit expanded recklessly, beyond the realistic capacity of the economy to expand its output, then the future would deliver failure and disorder. If the new lending was restrained too severely, then feasible ventures would languish and the future could not realize its actual potential. The Federal Reserved estimates of the future were calculated by scientific reasoning, of course, but the function closely resembled the prophetic role of the ancient temple priests who were given divine license to look into the future and foretell whether lean or abundant years lay ahead. The Federal Reserve governors also made prophecy, but they had the ability to make their own predictions come true.

The Fed’s leverage for controlling the banks’ expansion of credit was a mechanism inherited from centuries of banking history, the requirement that each bank hold a portion of its total deposits in reserve, a guarantee that it would always have sufficient funds for normal banking business. The reserves must be deposited at one of the twelve Federal Reserve Banks or held as cash in the bank’s vault. Reserves were like earnest money against the possibility of bad surprises, a rash of failed loans or a rush of withdrawals by depositors. The Fed’s reserve requirements varied according to the size of the banks and the types of accounts, but the basic requirement set for member banks in 1979 was 16.25 percent. For every $600 a bank held in checking accounts, it must park approximately $100 at the local branch of the Fed —idle money, collecting no interest. Thus, the total reserves held in the Reserve Banks was about $41 billion, backing about $258 billion in demand deposits. When all the currency held by the public was added, the total came to about $362 billion. That was the nation’s basic money supply, the monetary aggregate called M-l.

To expand the money supply or contract it, the Federal Reserve created more reserves for the banking system or withdrew reserves— using its two small valves, the Discount lending directly to banks or the open-market purchase and sale of U.S. government securities. When the Fed bought Treasury bills or bonds, it simply credited the newly created money to the reserve account of whichever financial institution sold it the securities. It didn’t much matter which bank was the seller, because once the money was in the banking system, it was free to flow to wherever it was needed. If the Fed bought from a brokerage firm instead of a bank, it had the same effect. The Fed credited the reserve account of the broker’s bank which in turn credited the broker’s individual account.

Either way, the Fed’s action increased the total reserves of the banking system—and thus allowed the total money supply to grow too. The Fed injections, whether they came through the Discount window at the Reserve Banks or the Open Market Desk at the New York Federal Reserve Bank, were called “high-powered money” because of this unique property: whatever new money the Federal Reserve added would be multiplied many times through the money-creation powers of the commercial banks.

The act of multiplication seemed dizzying too. If the Fed injected $1 billion in new reserve deposits, the banking system could immediately commit $840 million of it to new loans, setting aside 16 percent to satisfy the reserve requirement. The $840 million in new loans would instantly create $840 million in new deposits. It didn’t matter which banks got the deposit accounts; the new deposits would immediately be the basis for new lending. The banks would set aside 16 percent of the $840 million and lend out another $706 million. Those loans would immediately become new deposits again and permit still more new lending, another $593 million, and so on in diminishing sums. This multiplying process in which new credit became new money continued until the banks exhausted the additional lending capacity created for them by the new reserves added by the Fed. The original $1 billion injected by the Federal Reserve became more than $5 billion in new deposits—deposits that were now counted in the nation’s money supply, the M-l aggregate.

Every resourceful banker, every well-managed bank, naturally worked to take maximum advantage of these powers—since more loans meant more interest earnings for the bank—and so the natural state of the banking system was to be “booked up,” its reserves fully committed to the last possible dollar. In slack times, if a bank could not find enough borrowers to soak up its credit capacity, then it would buy government bonds that paid interest—using the same money-creating process. The bank simply wrote a check or created a deposit for whoever sold it the securities.

When a bank’s portfolio exceeded its reserves, perhaps because its lending policy was too aggressive, it had two choices. It had to get in balance by the close of the Fed’s weekly reporting period. It could call in some loans and extinguish the deposits, but that was awkward. More typically, it would simply borrow the reserves temporarily, perhaps overnight or for two or three days, either from other banks that had a surplus in their reserve accounts or, if necessary, from the Federal Reserve itself. The bank-to-bank borrowing of reserve funds, known as the Federal Funds market, sometimes exceeded $125 billion a day, traded in the money market by telephone and Telex.

The price of this overnight borrowing was the interest rate known as the Federal Funds rate—the rate that reacted most sensitively and immediately to the slightest changes in supply and demand. If many banks were short on reserves, they would have to bid up the Fed Funds rate to get them; when credit was slack and the money supply exceeded the banking system’s demand for funds, the Fed Funds rate fell. It was the leading indicator of where interest rates were headed, generally.

In terms of control, the Federal Reserve manipulated the Federal Funds rate more surely than anything else in the financial system; the Fed’s own daily actions would move the rate up or down quite precisely and almost instantly, as reserves were added or withdrawn from the banking system. The Fed Funds rate also served as a daily barometer for other short-term rates, from three-month Treasury bills to commercial paper issued by corporations. It was watched closely by everyone, by the Fed itself to judge credit conditions in the banking system, and by the Fed watchers of Wall Street to figure out whether the Federal Reserve was easing or tightening or holding steady.

The Federal Funds rate provided the most precise model of how the Federal Reserve manipulated interest rates—the price of borrowed money. Its influence was imperfect but powerful. The basic premise was the rule of supply and demand, but the dynamics were more complex than that. If the Fed restricted the inflowing supply of new reserves below the banking system’s demand for them, naturally the price went up. The Federal Funds rate rose as banks bid among themselves for the scarce supply of excess funds. That part was straightforward. But the Federal Reserve’s control also directly influenced the demand side of the equation. When it forced this interest rate to rise, that discouraged borrowers from taking on new loans and compelled banks, in turn, to slow down the expansion of their loan portfolios. Demand subsided and came back in balance with supply. Reality, of course, did not operate as neatly as the model, since many other independent forces also simultaneously influenced the demand for new credit and the supply.

Given the fluid nature of finance, manipulations of the Fed Funds rate would swiftly ripple across the entire spectrum of short-term lending, with similar feedback effects on supply and demand. With rare exceptions, the hydraulics of the money market faithfully responded to the engineer’s direction. When the Fed raised or lowered the Fed Funds rate, bank CDs, commercial paper, T-bills and the others followed.

Long-term interest rates were powerfully influenced by the Fed too, but with less predictable results. The bond market had a mind of its own, and bond investors made their own forecasts of the future, particularly of future inflation. Notwithstanding the immediate conditions of supply and demand, they might decide to bid long-term rates in a contrary direction—if they concluded that the Fed’s management of money or other economic factors would alter the dollar’s value many years hence. The Fed had the power to pull short-term interest rates up or down, but it had to coax and persuade the long-term investors.

The ideological implications of the money system had to be understood on two different planes. The idea of money created through new debt offended many conservatives because, in essence, it was a forward-looking process, a social commitment to the future. Bankers were not ordinarily thought of as a progressive element in American politics, yet banking itself functioned on the premise of progress, on a working belief that reliable gambles could be made on the future. On this faith rested the process of economic growth, the financing of new ideas and ventures, of change and innovation. The folk wisdom feared debt, yet future prosperity depended on it.

The folk fears were correct in only one sense: if a society contracted too many claims against the future, if it amassed debts that the future economic effort could not possibly pay off, sooner or later it would pay the consequences. Borrowers would fail to meet their obligations; lenders would lose their gamble. Bankers, as a consequence, dwelt between two conflicting commandments: one was to be generous with the future, to take risks and make the loans that businesses needed to expand and consumers needed to buy; the other commandment was to be always prudent in the risk taking. The Federal Reserve was the governor for both.

Yet as a political arrangement, the American money system was profoundly conservative. Control was concentrated in a relatively few hands—the banking system and the Federal Reserve—and was shielded from any interference by other interests. The national government, the democratic equivalent of a sovereign, possessed the unique power to create credit and money, yet it delegated the power to others, a select group of private corporations that were licensed as commercial banks, without any specifications as to how the banks should allocate the credit. Who would qualify for loans and who would be denied? Which projects in the future were worthy gambles and which were speculative or redundant? The choices made by bankers had profound political consequences: which economic sectors would flourish, which cities and neighborhoods and regions of the country would thrive, and which ones would struggle or even perish. The Federal Reserve remained silent on those questions, adhering to a laissez-faire ideology. Those priorities, it maintained, were better settled in the free-market auctions.

The basic mechanics of money regulation, the way in which the Federal Reserve restrained or encouraged the expansion of credit, in turn, regulated the entire American economy. Credit expansion was not the only factor that determined whether production and consumption would expand or shrink, whether new factories would be built or consumers would buy more cars and houses, but expanding credit was the necessary precondition. Neither production nor consumption could grow if credit was not growing too. Too little new credit would starve commerce. Too much new money would eventually produce another ailment called inflation.

In simple mechanical terms, the Fed’s money regulation of the economy resembled a series of interlocking gear wheels. The first gear, turning slowly but powerfully, represented bank reserves, totally controlled by the Federal Reserve. The reserves, in turn, drove the faster gear wheel, bank lending. And the pace of bank lending powerfully influenced a huge and vastly more complicated gearbox, the entire economy of real work and enterprise—the borrowing and buying, producing and consuming that were central to every citizen’s wellbeing.

The metaphor of interlocking gears described the basic relationship —reserves to bank lending to real economic activity. But it failed to convey the full flavor of this system, the complexities and ambiguities that existed daily at each stage of the process. At times, the money system resembled not smooth-running gears but large and wobbly flywheels connected only by loose belts—drive belts that were elastic, stretching or contracting on their own or sometimes slipping impotently. At times, the different flywheels seemed to be pulling in opposite directions. At times, even the monetary experts inside the Federal Reserve had difficulty figuring out which wheel was driving the system and which ones were being driven.

Inside the Federal Reserve System, the appointment of Paul Volcker was widely regarded as the restoration. After a long period of diversion and instability, the Fed would be returned to its true values, the style of management and authority that was the pride of the institution. Even career staff members who were not personal admirers felt a sense of relief that Volcker was taking charge.

In its institutional memory, the Fed celebrated only two chairmen from its past, two men who had made a great impact on how the Federal Reserve worked and who embodied its spirit. One was Marri-ner Eccles, the Republican banker from Utah who became one of the creative minds in Franklin Roosevelt’s inner circle. Eccles wrote the New Deal legislation that reformed the Federal Reserve System and he served as chairman for nearly fourteen years. On the seventieth anniversary of the Federal Reserve Act, in 1983, the building on Constitution Avenue was renamed in his honor. The Fed’s second office building, across C Street, built in 1974, was already named for the other esteemed chairman, William McChesney Martin, who served from Harry Truman to Richard Nixon. Martin provided the Fed’s favorite operating cliche—“leaning against the wind”—which meant that proper money policy should adroitly counter the directions of the business cycles. The Fed would tighten when economic expansion threatened to reach inflationary stages; it would ease when the economy was in contraction. “The Federal Reserve’s job,” he once joked, “is to take away the punch bowl just when the party gets going.” The process was considerably more complicated than the cliche, but Martin personified the Fed mystique of intuitive decision making—looking at all factors in the economy and deciding, season to season, which ones were most important. This discretionary style, whether valid or not, made it nearly impossible for outside critics to know exactly how the Federal Reserve determined its money policy.

For ten years, however, the Federal Reserve had been run by two men who, for different reasons, were considered alien to its traditions. William Miller was regarded as too complacent about inflation and too responsive to the Carter White House. He was a business executive who did not seem to understand the subtleties of Federal Reserve power. Arthur Burns, a conservative economist who served as Fed chairman during the Nixon and Ford years, was remembered in almost the opposite terms, a domineering egotist who bullied and manipulated fellow governors and staff economists, who was not above deliberately mismatching the monetary numbers in order to win votes inside the Federal Open Market Committee.

As a former corporate CEO, Miller was impatient with the unwritten protocol of the Board of Governors and the Federal Open Market Committee, the “collegial atmosphere” in which every opinion was to be respected. Miller was used to running things. Weary of lengthy speeches from the others, he brought an egg timer to the meetings and tried, unsuccessfully, to limit their orations to three minutes. At his first board meeting, the new chairman placed a small sign on the oval table in the boardroom: “Thank You for Not Smoking.” The others were not amused. They looked at the sign—and lit up. “Miller was a CEO and he expected people to follow his orders,” Governor Philip Coldwell said. “The sign stayed. And we smoked.”

On a more substantive level, Miller was considered too sanguine about the outlook for inflation. He also did not seem to understand the special aura of authority that came with his position. Early in his tenure, when the board was considering an increase in the Discount rate, Miller voted against it and lost, 4 to 3. Colleagues gently suggested he reconsider his vote, but Miller persisted. The news shook the financial markets the next day—a sign of weakness in the new chairman. The Federal Reserve chairman always voted with the majority, even if he had to change his own views to do so.

Arthur Burns, a Columbia University professor who was economic adviser to President Eisenhower in the 1950s and was appointed chairman by President Nixon in late 1969, was distrusted, even despised, on a deeper level. In public, Burns gave curmudgeonly sermons against inflation and enjoyed celebrity in Washington as the stern professor, the “Number One inflation fighter.” In the privacy of the Fed, many high-level officials considered him an arrogant fraud. Years afterward, professionals who served under him still spoke bitterly about his brutal treatment of them.

The Burns era, furthermore, produced the most damaging accusation of political collusion in the Federal Reserve’s history—the economic pump priming that helped Richard Nixon win a landslide reelection victory in 1972. The President’s federal budget was highly stimulative, and despite objections from senior governors, the Fed contributed its part to the campaign boom—rapid money growth that reached 11 percent three months before the election. An easy-money policy through the campaign season insured a robust economy and Nixon’s triumph. The following year, the nation paid for the excesses —runaway inflation that reached a new peak, then money-tightening by the Fed and a long, painful recession. Even some Federal Reserve governors who argued against Burns at the time excused his 1972 performance as “honest mistakes,” not political manipulation. But Washington politicians, particularly the Democrats, were quite cynical about the Fed’s denials. They saw a conservative Federal Reserve chairman pumping up the economy in order to re-elect his old friend, the Republican President who had appointed him. The memory of 1972 lingered over the institution like an embarrassing odor.

In Wall Street circles, G. William Miller was blamed for the surging inflation of 1978 and 1979, but Fed insiders understood that Miller had inherited errors made earlier by Burns—excessive money growth in late 1976 and 1977. One Fed official who worked closely with Burns attributed the mistakes to Burns’s deep desire to win appointment to another term as chairman from the new Democratic Administration elected in 1976. Money growth accelerated in the months right after Jimmy Carter’s election—and Burns began a private campaign to ingratiate himself with the Carter White House. His campaign for reappointment ultimately failed, but monetary economists attributed the subsequent surge of inflation to Burns’s overly generous money policy in the opening months of the Carter Administration.

When Volcker was appointed, many older staff members believed that he would revive the Fed’s good name and restore the traditions inherited from Eccles and Martin. The tradition called for a dominant leader who, while respecting the internal sensibilities, would produce prudent control of money growth—without yielding to the complaints and pressures from politicians in the White House or Congress.13

The chairmanship, in addition to technical expertise, required an adroit political operator, someone who could coexist peacefully with the other power centers of government and thus preserve the Federal Reserve’s most cherished legacy—its own independence.

Like most bureaucracies, the Federal Reserve regarded its own survival as a preeminent political goal, not solely as a matter of selfinterest, but because its officials sincerely believed (not unlike other bureaucrats in other agencies) that their functions were vital to the nation’s well-being. Fed officials were constantly, sometimes obsessively, sensitive to the fact that, in theory, Congress and the President could at any time abolish their privileged sanctuary. If the Fed went too far, if the elected politicians were sufficiently angered, they could simply rewrite the laws and make the Federal Reserve directly subservient to Congress or the executive branch. A wise chairman would know how far was too far.

Volcker was brilliantly prepared, both as technical expert and as political operator. His training was so extensive that he resembled a senior civil servant from the British system, a career man who stays in government while the elected officials come and go, who accumulates great influence because he knows every issue more thoroughly than the politicians whom he advises. That was quite rare in American government where high-level appointees were usually drawn from private careers, lawyers or business executives or scholars who made their reputations outside Washington.

Volcker was a public servant who had served the government in both capitals, Washington and Wall Street. He was a policy maker under four Republican and Democratic Presidents and had spent years on Capitol Hill fencing with congressional committees and lobbying for votes. He was in Treasury when John F. Kennedy proposed the stimulative tax cuts of the early 1960s and when Lyndon Johnson launched the U.S. war in Indochina. Under Nixon, he worked closely with Treasury Secretary John Connally, an urbane Texas politician who frequently complained about Volcker’s dowdy appearance (Connally once threatened to fire him if Volcker did not get a haircut and buy a new suit).

Together, Connally and Volcker engineered the most fundamental change in the world’s monetary system since World War II—the dismantling of the Bretton Woods agreement that had made the U.S. dollar the stable bench mark for all currencies. The changes that began in 1971 meant the final abandonment of gold as a U.S. guarantee behind its money and the introduction of floating exchange rates among the world’s major currencies. Some critics still condemned Volcker bitterly for his role in those reforms, but he himself had originally argued for preserving the system of fixed exchange rates. In the course of those controversies, Volcker traveled the globe, confronting and bargaining with finance ministers and central bankers of every industrial nation. In the policy battles of Washington, his opponents included the Federal Reserve Board chairman, Arthur Burns. Volcker and Connally won.

And there was this wonderful irony about the man: Volcker was not interested in money, at least not in acquiring it for himself. One of the minor absurdities of the Federal Reserve System was that Federal Reserve Bank presidents, whose salaries were set by their boards of directors, not by Congress, were paid much more generously than the governors and the chairman. Thus, when Volcker left the New York Fed to return to Washington as chairman, he had to accept a salary cut of 50 percent—from $116,000 to just under $60,000. He lived comfortably but without the ostentatious consumption that Washington elites often favored. While his family stayed in New York, the chairman commuted on weekends and lived alone in Washington in a small apartment not far from the Fed building. Volcker made a small personal fetish of smoking cheap cigars and seeking out inexpensive Chinese restaurants. If someone took him to dinner at one of Washington’s glossier places, he would grumble about the prices on the menu.

Not even his harshest critics questioned his personal integrity. With his resume and brilliance, Volcker could easily have tripled or quadrupled his income any time he chose to go to work at a Wall Street brokerage or bank. He sounded a trifle old-fashioned, lamenting the fact that so few young people wanted to make the same choice of public service that he had. “The best of our young gravitate toward Wall Street, instead of Washington, our statehouses or our courthouses,” he complained to an audience at Harvard. “Or, perhaps more accurately, a great many of them do end up in Washington—to run a lobby or represent a client.”14

“Everyone laughed because Paul always had shiny suits, hut he had to watch his money,” Vice Chairman Frederick Schultz said. “His wife had a little accounting business, but he had to watch their spending. He really doesn’t care about the things that money buys, a big house in the country, a fancy car. He just doesn’t care.”

Back in Teaneck, New Jersey, where he grew up, Volcker was known as “Little Buddy.” His high-school yearbook noted that he “has an incredible knowledge of politics” and predicted that someday he might rise as high as town manager of Teaneck. Volcker’s father was city manager of the Teaneck municipal government for twenty years —an important clue to how Volcker saw himself.

“I never heard him talk about his father in this way,” a senior official at the New York Federal Reserve Bank said, “but I suspect he was heavily influenced by watching his father’s work. A city manager is supposed to see things in a dispassionate way, to look down the road and propose long-term solutions and continually battle with those who are only pushing their own short-term self-interests.”

The Federal Reserve was supposed to do the same thing. The city-manager form of government was a “good government” reform invented in the same historical period that created the Federal Reserve System, the Progressive era of Woodrow Wilson, and both shared the same premise—a technocratic vision of government that was suspicious of politics. City managers would “depoliticize” municipal government by promoting sound managerial solutions—building the new highway where it ought to go, not where some corrupt alderman wanted to build it. The Federal Reserve embraced precisely the same managerial spirit—a sense that government must be removed from politics in order to produce good policy. The Progressive reformers themselves were middle-class managers and civic leaders who distrusted the raw forces of democracy, the popular distempers and appetites. Their reforms were intended, fundamentally, to protect government from the people.

A professional city manager still had to deal in politics, however, pacifying and persuading the mayor and the city council, just as the Federal Reserve constantly must soothe and cajole Congress and the White House. This necessarily required artful manipulation and produced an uneven relationship that was often marked by disdain, even contempt. The technocrat who understands the facts must coax the ignorant politician into doing the “right thing.”

In his personal manner, Volcker reflected some of the same perspective and prejudices. He could be charming and droll, joking at a cocktail party about the dour reputation of central bankers: “We have a haunting fear that someone, someplace may be happy.” Or, confronting a contentious senator in a committee hearing, he could be brutally opaque. Often, he would lead a hostile questioner deeper and deeper into the esoterica of monetary policy until the embarrassed senator was lost in confusion.

“Volcker has a pretty low opinion of the intelligence of mankind on the whole, both practical and theoretical intelligence,” a former close associate said. “Whether he thinks nonbankers are more intelligent than bankers, I don’t know, but he certainly has a low opinion of bankers.”

If the authors of anti-Fed polemics looked more closely at the personal backgrounds of Federal Reserve governors, they would not find much to corroborate their theories of global conspiracy. They might conclude, instead, that the “Powers” were located not in the eastern Establishment banks of Wall Street but somewhere in the Middle West. The National Association of Home Builders, in fact, undertook such an investigation when its members were particularly outraged about high interest rates. The study was abandoned because the only pattern of connections it found led to small towns and state universities in Indiana, Ohio and Illinois.

Governor Philip Coldwell grew up in Urbana, Illinois, where his father was secretary of the YMCA. J. Charles Partee was from Defiance, Ohio. His father was a mailman. Nancy Teeters, the first woman to serve on the board, was from Marion, Indiana, the daughter of a salesman for a paper-box company. Emmett J. Rice, the second black man to be appointed governor, was raised in Washington, D.C., the son of a Methodist minister. Paul Volcker was also from modest origins, not poor but certainly not born to privilege.

Fred Schultz, the new vice chairman, was an exception, a wealthy banker. So was Henry C. Wallich, at sixty-five the scholarly elder of the board. Wallich was born in Germany in a family with a long history in banking, but emigrated as a young man to seek a different career in America. He was an academic economist at Yale before his appointment in 1974 and better known than his colleagues because he used to write a regular column for Newsweek.

A sociologist, examining the backgrounds of governors past and present, as well as senior staff economists, would find this pattern: despite occasional exceptions, most of the people who ran the Federal Reserve were drawn from the broad American middle class, even the lower middle class, without the help of social status or influential connections.

The Federal Reserve governors, it seemed, were splendid proof of an American meritocracy—a culture that rewarded bright and ambitious people regardless of their origins, that allowed them to rise to positions of exceptional authority in the society, without the need for family connections. Many governors thought of their own success as a series of happy accidents.

“I was a music student, a pretty good trumpet player, played in dance bands and so on, but you couldn’t make a living at it,” said Governor Partee, who was known to colleagues as Chuck. He studied music for a year at Indiana University, then transferred to the business school. He dropped out of graduate school to become a junior economist at the Chicago Federal Reserve Bank, worked six years for the Northern Trust Company, then joined the Federal Reserve Board’s research staff in Washington as chief of the capital markets section. In 1969, he became research director and seven years later Gerald Ford appointed him governor. Partee wore tweed jackets and snappy bow ties. With his scruffy little moustache, he looked like a slightly eccentric English professor. His speech was accented with blunt little exclamations—“huh” and “ah,” like a lecturer underscoring his point. “The only trouble with this job,” he said, “is that it doesn’t pay much money.”

Philip Coldwell, tall and acerbic, with a creased face that seemed avuncular, was a “System man” for thirty years. He graduated from the University of Illinois in chemical engineering, then switched to economics in graduate school at Wisconsin. As a staff adviser and president at the Dallas Fed, then as governor, Coldwell had attended the closed meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee since 1953, the insider with the longest tenure.

As the biographies suggested, one of the best ways to reach the Board of Governors was to work for the System itself. Most appointees were not career employees like Partee and Coldwell, but nearly all of them had had some prior experience at the Fed or one of the Reserve Banks. Even Nancy Teeters, known as the board’s most stalwart liberal and the most consistent critic of the conservatives around her, began her career as a junior economist at the Fed.

Like the governors, the Federal Reserve bureaucracy was cloistered from the normal tempests of politics. The board employed about sixteen hundred people in Washington (plus another twenty-three thousand at the twelve Reserve Banks), but most of them worked at prosaic tasks—collecting and sorting numbers or the “factory” chores at the regional banks, the check traffic, currency management and other services provided to commercial banks. The Fed’s elaborate systems for shipping canceled checks back to their bank of origin and balancing accounts daily among banks were essential to commerce, but no more mysterious than what the U.S. Postal Service did for mail.

Still, Fed bureaucrats had a special elan. They were set apart from the regular civil service and even underwent their own elaborate security rules before they could handle the banking numbers. Fortunes could be made if traders knew the money statistics a few days ahead of the market, and despite the temptations, the System had never suffered a major scandal. In the international division, economists were cleared to read CIA and State Department cables too.

The prestige belonged to the economists—about two hundred research economists in Washington and another two hundred and fifty at the Reserve Banks, the largest assemblage in the world. To bright young graduate students looking for jobs, the Federal Reserve seemed as prestigious as a major university, only the Fed’s scholars did not have to teach. Most of them were men—white men—and if they did not rise on the Fed’s management ladder, they could always turn to much more lucrative careers as Fed watchers or market analysts.15 “People develop expertise in very narrow areas,” a former staff economist explained. “Some may cover the Federal Funds market and they know everything there is to know about Federal Funds or commercial paper. After two or three years, they go on to banking or business with that expertise.”

The Fed’s “revolving door” with Wall Street created an unofficial fraternity of industry insiders, men who spoke the same language and traded gossip, not unlike the military officers who left the Pentagon to work for defense contractors. Indeed, the professional esprit at the Fed resembled the professional officers’ corps of the armed forces. “You almost don’t have to give orders,” one former economist said, “because the troops already know what the orders will be.”

The real power at the Fed was closely held, however. Despite the Fed’s vast bureaucracy, only a handful of employees below the Board of Governors—no more than fifty people on the central staff—had access to and actual influence on the most sensitive question, the making of monetary policy. When G. William Miller was Fed chairman, the staff director, Stephen H. Axilrod, became an extraordinarily powerful bureaucrat because he understood the technical issues, and Miller, who did not, followed his advice. When Paul Volcker became chairman, that ended abruptly.

The Federal Reserve Act commanded that a President, when selecting governors, “shall have due regard to a fair representation of the financial, agricultural, industrial and commercial interests and geographical divisions of the country.” But there were now no farmers, manufacturers, small-business men or labor leaders on the board. With only scattered exceptions, the Fed governors were drawn from two disciplines—financial economics and banking. In the case of the Federal Reserve Board, the American meritocracy allowed capable people to rise to the top, but it also screened them carefully. There were no radical thinkers or original theorists among them. No one with unorthodox opinions would be chosen.

The institution encouraged its own consensus and conformity. Individual governors were dependent on the senior staff for technical data and professional advice. Inevitably, this tended to narrow the range of opinions on any given issue, and it took a strong-willed governor to stand alone and repeatedly argue for a competing analysis.

Nancy Teeters was one. She was chief staff economist of the House Budget Committee when she was appointed in 1978 and was considered a most unusual choice. Jimmy Carter, anxious to advance women and minorities, insisted on finding a woman for the board (the first black governor, Andrew Brimmer, had been appointed by Lyndon Johnson). Teeters was well known and respected as a liberal economist, a disciple of John Maynard Keynes and the Keynesian principles that had guided the Democratic Party’s economic policy since FDR. Yet even Nancy Teeters felt membership in a special club.

At a dinner party in 1978 [she recalled], Arthur Burns was talking to me, asking me questions and it sounded like a job interview. I said, “Arthur, you don’t want someone like me on the Board of Governors with my liberal background.” Arthur said, “Don’t worry, Nancy. Within six months, you will think just like a central banker.”

Arthur was right. I think I’m very much a central banker now. You’re in a position where your views on money, credit and banking are not really a reflection of your political party or your positions on economic issues. It’s not really a political job. I understand the whole milieu of what we are doing, the continuous decisions, the mystique of central banking.





