3 A PACT WITH THE DEVIL


The new chairman of the Federal Reserve Board sounded a lot like the old chairman and like the chairman before him. An immutable feature of the American political dialogue was that the Federal Reserve chairman always delivered the strongest, most eloquent sermons against the dangers of inflation. After Paul Volcker took the oath of office on August 6, 1979, he continued the tradition.

To be sure [Volcker told the House Budget Committee], the impact of inflation is uneven. Those on fixed incomes suffer, while some people who are well positioned—either by clever design or by good luck—do manage to increase their wealth. Even for the fortunate, however, such a result is at best precarious, frequently built on heavy indebtedness or highly speculative investments. . . .

It is not entirely a coincidence that we can observe in these recent inflationary years a declining tendency in the profitability of investment . . . one estimate indicates that the annual after-tax return on corporate net worth, measured, as it should reasonably be, against the replacement cost of inventories and fixed assets, has averaged 3.8 percent during the 1970s, a period characterized by rapid inflation, as compared to 6.6 percent in the 1960s. . . .

In other areas, inflationary expectations are reflected in a diversion of energies into essentially speculative activities—ranging from the “froth” of investing in art objects to the considered purchase, at the expense of heavy indebtedness, of larger or second homes as an inflation hedge.

The public, if it was listening, was not persuaded. People kept borrowing and buying. The inflation rate was hovering around 14 percent. Consumer debt, the loans to buy cars and houses and other items, was growing faster than consumer incomes, approaching a historic peak. The prospect of continuing inflation seemed more reliable than any political promises to stop it.

Volcker appreciated the public skepticism. “We’ve lost that euphoria that we had fifteen years ago, that we knew all the answers to managing the economy,” he conceded. As he made the rounds of public speeches and testimony before congressional committees, he defined the problem in two parts: first, the tangible effects of inflationary pressures on the economy and, second, the psychological momentum of “inflationary expectations.” As long as people believed that rising prices were inevitable, then they would be. Labor unions would demand escalator contracts that protected their members’ real wages from erosion. Retailers would try to anticipate next month’s rising costs by raising this month’s prices. Producers would postpone new capital investment. Creditors would demand higher interest rates. In the long run, Volcker’s central challenge was to convince everyone they were wrong.

“For its part,” Volcker assured audiences, “the Federal Reserve intends to continue its efforts to restrain the growth of money and credit, a growth that in recent months has been excessive in terms of our own 1979 objectives.”1 The Federal Open Market Committee set annual target ranges for the rate of money growth it expected to allow. For M-l, the basic aggregate of spending money, the Fed wanted growth of only 1.5 to 4.5 percent in 1979. But, for the last three months, money had been growing at an annual rate of more than 10 percent—nearly three times higher than the upper limit the Fed had set for M-l growth.

Bland as Volcker’s remarks might have sounded to outsiders, for financial markets his words translated into a clear signal: he intended to tighten down, holding back the infusion of new reserves until— gradually—the rate of money growth subsided and came back within the target range. This meant raising interest rates—perhaps a lot.

The question was how far Volcker was willing to push up rates. At the second board meeting where he presided as chairman, on August 16, the seven governors unanimously accepted a historic milestone, which in other circumstances might have jarred the markets. They raised the Discount rate from 10 to 10.5 percent—the highest level in the sixty-five-year history of the Federal Reserve System. The Discount rate applied to the hundreds of millions in daily loans that the twelve Federal Reserve Banks routinely made to commercial banks that were temporarily short of reserves. The Discount rate was the floor price of short-term credit. When the governors raised it, that meant other short-term interest rates would be going up too.

The financial markets were barely stirred by the action because they were expecting much more from the Hew chairman. The governors themselves were divided, however, on how tough the Fed should get. At two successive board meetings in early September, Volcker proposed additional increases in the Discount rate, but had to back off because it became clear he might not have a majority behind him.

Most economists, including the Fed’s, were forecasting a recession, but then economists had been expecting one for many months and they had been wrong. Despite the aggravations of inflation, President Carter had presided over one of the longest and most expansive periods of economic growth in postwar history, four years of recovery starting in 1976. In confidential forecasts for the governors, the Federal Reserve senior staff predicted a deteriorating economy in the third quarter, then a recession by the Christmas holidays of 1979. The contraction of economic activity might last as long as nine months, the Fed staff thought.2

If correct, the forecast was a terrible political portent for the President—a shrinking economy leading right up to the 1980 election. Of all the many factors that influenced election returns, the most powerful was the ebb and flow of the national economy. A growing economy that increased real personal income and reduced unemployment rewarded the incumbent party and President; a declining economy threatened them with punishment from voters, regardless of other accomplishments or personal popularity.

As with other political issues, timing was everything. Naturally, no President would wish for recession. But, if recession was inevitable, the President might be better off if it occurred sooner rather than later —so the economy would be growing again in time for the campaign season, and the ill effects of the unemployment would be forgotten by voters. Earlier in 1979, at least one adviser, Treasury Under Secretary Anthony M. Solomon, had urged President Carter “to take a recession” now and get it over. Otherwise, Solomon warned, the President would be confronted with both rapid inflation and rising unemployment in the midst of his re-election campaign. Jimmy Carter, ever the optimist, ignored the advice.

By late summer, the President’s options looked much worse. Lyle E. Gramley, a member of the President’s Council of Economic Advisers and former research director at the Federal Reserve Board, described the bind confronting White House policy makers: “We face a cruel dilemma. If policy actions are taken to offset slow growth and a rising unemployment rate, we will lose some of the gains we expect on inflation. If we tighten budgetary policy to dampen inflation further, we will lower growth and raise unemployment.”3

The same trade-off that faced the President’s budget policy confronted the Federal Reserve and its monetary policy. If the Fed tightened credit in order to brake the inflationary spiral, would it also tip the economy into recession? If the Fed failed to tighten, inflation would likely grow worse.

In public, Paul Volcker did not sound as gloomy as did the predictions from the Fed staff. Economic adjustments, Volcker suggested, “need not by themselves set in motion a deep or prolonged contraction in activity . . . some of the economic and financial dislocations and imbalances that usually have presaged severe cyclical declines have been avoided . . . [the position] that the economy should grow moderately in 1980 still seems reasonable.”

In private, Volcker was less sanguine. He was beginning to consider policy options that would provide a sharp brake, not a gradual deceleration, and he shared his thoughts with a very small circle of insiders. Like a cautious politician preparing for a major campaign, Volcker was testing the political climate inside his own institution. If he was going to lead, the chairman first had to be sure that others would follow.

Both the Board of Governors and the federal open market committee were divided and drifting. Miller’s weak leadership had produced months of contention and some confusion. Volcker was familiar with the arguments because, as president of the New York Reserve Bank, he had been a regular voting member of the FOMC for the past four years and participated in them. “This is a brand-new chairman,” Coldwell said of him. “Sure, Paul had been in the System a long time . . . but he was still a new chairman. Others who had been supporting Miller hadn’t been weaned away from that position.”

Back in the spring, when the inflation rate was taking off, Volcker himself had challenged Miller’s stewardship. Normally, the New York president worked closely with the chairman and tried to support him on policy issues, but at FOMC meetings in March and April Volcker had joined Wallich and Coldwell in formal dissents. The three most senior and respected members were voting against the chairman, pushing him toward a tougher money policy. “That created quite a stir,” Coldwell said. “The three of us had never ganged up on the chairman before, and I think we bent things a little bit. Others became a little disenchanted with the chairman. It became a very fragmented board.”

At a distance, the arguments seemed to be over quite small differences, even petty distinctions. The FOMC members often split over whether the Federal Funds rate, the key barometer for credit conditions, should be raised a quarter of 1 percent or not. Chairman Miller supported periodic increases, but they were always quite modest. Miller and his supporters feared that more dramatic action on interest rates would depress sectors like housing and autos, which depended heavily on lending for their sales, and that would lead to a general recession.

“They were arguing that the Federal Reserve would be in the position of killing off the whole recovery,” Coldwell said with impatience. “We were only talking about a quarter percent increase—and within the year we would be talking about 2 or 3 percent.”

The internal conflicts crystallized for Volcker on September 18, confronting him with a delicate dilemma. The twelve Reserve Bank presidents came to town for the regular meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and joined the seven governors at the huge mahogany table in the boardroom. By meeting time, they had all digested the voluminous staff reports on the economy, including the most important one, the so-called “blue book,” which described the policy choices. Through the morning, each governor or president would have a turn to speak, though only five of the bank presidents would have a vote. Usually before a lunch break, the chairman offered a proposition and the twelve members of the FOMC announced their votes.

The “blue book” prepared by the senior staff for the September 18 session described the market effects of what the FOMC had authorized six weeks before, in early August: “In response to the System’s tightening actions, short-term interest rates have generally advanced about three quarters to 1.5 percentage points . . . and long-term bond yields have moved up 25 to 45 basis points. The relative sharp response of market interest rates appeared to reflect anticipation of further tightening by the System in the face of continued rapid inflation and monetary growth.” For the last three months, the basic money aggregate, M-l, had grown at an annual rate of 10.6 percent, far above what the Fed itself had set as its goal for the year. Only further tightening would bring down the money-supply growth to within the target range. The financial markets, therefore, expected more of the same—higher interest rates to dampen credit expansion.4

The question was: how much higher? The senior staff did not make recommendations, but it offered the details of plausible alternatives— one for easing, one for standing pat and one for tightening. None of these policy alternatives suggested anything more than small changes in the Fed’s posture. According to the minutes, no FOMC member was in favor of easing credit, not when inflation was close to 14 percent and the money supply was far above the target.

But some members argued for no change at all. Interest rates had risen substantially in recent months and sooner or later that ought to have an impact on credit expansion and the economy. The cautious members thought the Federal Open Market Committee “should avoid policy actions that might intensify the developing weakness in the economic activity.”

But the majority opted for “slight additional firming,” as the FOMC minutes put it. That meant Alternative C from the “blue book,” which called for raising the Federal Funds rate only .5 percent, from 11.5 to 12 percent, with leeway to go as high as 12.5 percent. That was supposed to slow down the money growth in the coming weeks, but only gradually.

To get a majority, Volcker had to soften even that small step. The final proposal, adopted as an operating directive for the Open Market Desk in New York, authorized the traders there to shoot for a Federal Funds rate of only 11.75—an increase of only one-quarter of a percent. Given the roaring pressures of inflation, this was hardly more than a nudge.

The vote was 8 to 4, because several committee members thought the policy was too soft. Three entered dissents—Governors Wallich and Coldwell and John Balles, president of the San Francisco Reserve Bank—on the grounds that the Fed should tighten more aggressively. The Federal Funds rate should be pushed up to 12 percent, they argued, or the money supply would continue to expand excessively. One other governor, Emmett J. Rice, dissented in the other direction —insisting that further tightening, even one-quarter of a percent, might be too much for the economy.

After the FOMC finished its business, the seven governors reconvened in a meeting of the Board of Governors to consider the prerogative it did not share with the Reserve Bank presidents—the power to set the Discount rate, the rate the Fed charged for its short-term liquidity loans to banks. Proposals for increases or decreases were forwarded as recommendations from the boards of directors of the Reserve Banks, but the question was decided only by the seven governors in Washington.

The Board of Governors was split too, 4 to 3. They voted for the increase—only this time the dissenters were pulling in the other direction. Governors Teeters, Partee and Rice argued together for no change at all. “More time was needed,” they asserted, “to assess current uncertainties in the economic outlook and the impact of increasing restraint . . . over the course of recent months.”5

For the new chairman, the situation resembled a squeeze play— dissenters pulling in opposite directions. One faction insisted the Fed must get tougher with the economy and the other feared that the Fed might already be too tough.

Vice Chairman Schultz said:

You have to recognize that Nancy Teeters was the most liberal member of the board, a dyed-in-the-wool Keynesian. She had less concern about inflation than any of the others. She continued to believe that a gradualist approach would work. She thought we ought to wait and see after the FOMC action. Chuck [Partee] was kind of on the fence. The inflationary thing was bothering him a great deal, but he wanted to go slowly. Emmett [Rice] came around a little bit later.

Board members used the labels sparingly, but “liberal” and “conservative” implied distinct philosophical differences about the purposes of monetary policy. A liberal like Teeters would focus on the trade-off between inflation and unemployment, between the benefit that higher interest rates might produce in moderating prices and the damage they would do to the real economy, destroying jobs and businesses. Most of the senior economists in the Federal Reserve had been schooled in the same tradition—a sense that they must balance their choices and weigh the costs. Inflation must be resisted, but easier money policy also produced social benefits—full employment, rising incomes, fewer Americans who could not find work.

“I am one of those who came out of graduate school convinced that a little inflation was a good thing,” Governor Partee reflected. “Inflation lubricated the economy and it was better to have low unemployment. People’s incomes would adjust.”

A conservative like Henry Wallich would argue that there really wasn’t any choice. “I regard inflation as a form of fraud,” Wallich said, much worse than an ordinary swindle because it was the government itself defrauding citizens—wiping out the value of their assets by debasing the nation’s money. From Wallich’s perspective, the Federal Reserve had only one choice—to do its best to stabilize the value of money.

These underlying tensions collided in the arguments of September 18, as they often did in the Federal Reserve’s deliberations. The Fed was divided between “hawks” and “doves,” code words that entered the language during the war in Vietnam to define the political debate over continuing the war. “Phil Coldwell and Henry Wallich were the hawks and I was getting there pretty fast,” Fred Schultz said. “Paul was for the Discount increase but the strong arguments were from me, Coldwell and Wallich.”

The cautious, gradual incrementalism of the September decisions was exactly what conservative critics had complained about for years. Politicians might pressure the Fed to proceed slowly, but some academic economists, market analysts and bankers argued that the Fed’s action was always too little and too late. The Federal Funds rate and the Discount rate would be raised, but never sharply enough to make much difference—“always behind the curve,” critics complained. The Fed, they argued, was too worried about keeping interest rates stable, for fear of upsetting the money markets. It should forget about interest rates and, instead, focus directly on the one lever through which it could really control the money supply—the creation of bank reserves.

Federal Reserve officials read the newspapers. They followed quite closely the daily chatter from the financial markets, as reported in the “Credit Markets” column of The Wall Street Journal and elsewhere in the financial press. They also read the scholarly critiques published in economic journals, but they listened most diligently to the market talk.

Paul Volcker was not especially upset by the closeness of the 4-3 vote on the Discount increase—but the financial markets were. The reactions from Wall Street the next day interpreted it as a defeat for him. Short-term interest rates fell sharply as investors concluded that the Fed under Volcker would be less aggressive than they had expected, that the dissenters would keep him from any future increases.

The 4-3 split, The Wall Street Journal reported, “indicates that Mr. Volcker’s drive for a restrictive monetary policy may encounter increasing opposition.” Wall Street analysts made a practice of reading the dissenting votes at the Fed like a leading indicator: if the governors became evenly divided on their direction, that meant they would not go any further.6

Moreover, if Wall Street was skeptical about the new chairman’s ability to halt inflation, so was the rest of America.

Jack Brod, owner of Empire Diamond and Gold, a precious-metals exchange on the sixty-sixth floor of the Empire State Building in Manhattan, had to hire a security guard to handle the crowds. He roped off part of the hallway to make the lines more orderly. Brod could still not keep up.

“I’d get here in the morning and there would be people waiting outside the office in the lobby,” he said. “They took blankets and they slept outside until we opened the door. They brought food and ate their breakfast.”

The people brought old jewelry and silverware, candelabra, platters, rings, anything that contained gold or silver. A dentist brought a pile of gold inlays and silver fillings he had removed from teeth over five years, a $3,000 sale. Others showed up with fine heirlooms that had been in their families for generations.

“We were getting calls from all over the world, people wanting to sell silver bars,” Brod said. “I could have bought a hundred thousand ounces of silver in a day if I wanted, but I didn’t want to get stuck with it. The refiners got several months behind. We had to send it to Switzerland where they would process it faster.”7

The frenzy at Empire Diamond and Gold was repeated in jewelry stores, pawnshops and other exchanges across the country—ignited by the price of gold and silver. Silver had sold for $6 an ounce in January. By August, it rose to $10 and hit $17 in September—nearly tripled in value in nine months. Gold, which sold for $300 in July, was now at $450 and still climbing. In the months ahead, silver prices would triple again, surpassing $50 an ounce, and the price of gold would peak at $875.

Wallace Silversmiths, Inc., which manufactured silverware in Wallingford, Connecticut, would have to lay off more than half of its workers as the price of its basic commodity kept escalating. “We publish a price list to dealers,” said Arthur Bowker, vice president of the company, “but we couldn’t print the price list fast enough. They had to be printed, then mailed to the main store and they were always out of date.”8

This was what Paul Volcker called the “froth” of inflationary expectations. In the autumn of 1979, the United States experienced a kind of price frenzy—a flight from its own currency. Americans were in a rush of buying and selling which assumed that dollars would continue to lose more and more of their value. The only safe haven for their wealth—and the opportunity to increase it—lay in tangibles. Buy gold, buy art and antiques, buy real estate. The rush of new buyers drove prices even higher—reinforcing the impression that this was the place to put one’s money. The trick was to buy and sell fast while the price was rising and before it collapsed, as bubbles of speculations always did.

In the Middle West, the expectations of continuing inflation led otherwise cautious farmers to make serious long-term investments, to buy expensive new farm machinery or another hundred acres of farmland. When farmers borrowed, they used their land as collateral, and as land prices escalated, their collateral grew, expanding their ability to borrow.

“Lenders would come out to the farm,” Jim Clark of Mount Ayr, Iowa, explained, “and they would say, ‘That tractor looks a bit aging.’

So a farmer would buy a new one. Why not? Land was going up, machinery was going up.” Farm economists from the state universities gave farmers the same advice—increase your holdings, your capital investment, to stay ahead of inflation.

“They were telling us: ‘Get that land bought, it won’t be as cheap as it is now,’” said Sandy Shields, another resident of Mount Ayr.

“We didn’t throw money at anybody,” a local banker, Roger Kerndt, president of Hawkeye Bank and Trust, insisted. An economist from Iowa State University, Kerndt said, “was telling people to leverage. Economists were saying you’d better be leveraged 10 to 1. And you could be. People, including bankers, were doing what they thought was the right thing to do. You make your decisions on what you see. There wasn’t hardly a soul who didn’t think inflation would keep going up.”

For farmers, increasing their debt leverage was easy, a simple matter of bookkeeping at the bank, as Kerndt explained. “When that eighty acres went up for sale next to him, of course it looked like a good deal and we went along,” the banker said. “Everybody’s memory was so short. If a guy’s financial statement looked bad and he wanted to buy land, you just add a hundred dollars to the acre on his collateral.”9

In southern California, the action was in housing. Across the nation, the value of property was increasing monthly at an annual rate of 17 percent, but the truly spectacular boom was in the splendid towns and cities along the Pacific coast south of Los Angeles. The San Diego Board of Realtors had doubled its membership since 1975. In affluent communities like Newport Beach, housing values increased by 100 percent in less than five years.10

Herbert Young, president of Gibraltar Financial Corporation, a Los Angeles savings and loan, kept thinking the market would cool off as interest rates on home mortgages continued to rise. In the beginning of 1985, the mortgage rate in California was 9.25 percent. A year later it hit 10.75 percent. By September, it was above 12 percent.

“I would have sworn that the 11.5 would put the nail in the coffin,” Young said. “But the buyers out here are voracious.” Instead of looking backward, home buyers were looking forward. “People usually look back to six or nine months ago and they see lower rates and they expect those rates to return,” Young explained. “But that didn’t happen. This time, they were looking ahead and saw higher rates.”11

People were not simply buying homes to live in or even as long-term investments. They were buying homes in order to sell them again quickly. The Irvine Ranch, a huge housing development in Orange County, was celebrated for a transaction in which a buyer bought a condominium for $87,050 and resold it two weeks later—before the mortgage closing was completed—for $117,500.12

David Parry, an economist studying the real-estate boom in the San Francisco Bay area, overheard a conversation between two buyers in a Contra Costa County subdivision. Between them, they were purchasing six houses on six different streets. The manager of the development conceded that 60 percent of his sales were to people who did not intend to live in the homes.

“You could see the speculation in the advertisements,” Parry said. “Homes were advertised for resale that hadn’t been built yet. In the ads, they used pictures from the housing brochure.”

Like gold and silver, the rush of speculators into housing increased the demand for homes—artificially—and stimulated more construction. “Builders tend to be rather unsophisticated,” Parry said. “They build on the me-too syndrome. They see a hundred homes being built on the market and bought. They say, me too, and pretty soon there are a thousand homes. The speculators don’t represent real demand, so they exacerbate the oversupply.”13

In less obvious ways, the same distortions were spreading throughout the U.S. economy. It was not just home builders and silver dealers and farmers who acted on inflationary expectations. The impulses were driving the decisions of major businesses and manufacturers and the lending policies of the largest commercial banks. Even though the economy was growing at a modest rate, total bank lending increased by nearly 22 percent in September—nearly double the already high rate of credit expansion that had occurred in August. Construction loans, home mortgages and farm debt were minor shares. Most of the new borrowing was made up of commercial and industrial loans. In a three-month period, U.S. corporations added $40 billion in additional liabilities to their balance sheets.14

It was exhilarating and also a bit frightening. As evidence of the hyperactive economy accumulated, the governors and senior economists of the Federal Reserve Board were having second thoughts about gradualism.

Governor Partee was particularly taken aback. A few days after the Board of Governors had split, 4 to 3, on raising the Discount rate, he went to New York to address a meeting of market analysts. “We had extremely poor credibility,” Partee said later. “And I got extremely hostile questions. I was chastised for not voting for the Discount increase. Didn’t I realize the metals markets were going wild? Didn’t I realize the Mexican peso was now favored over the dollar?”

Partee changed his mind. The hawks were right. Something more had to be done.

Governor Coldwell, among others, was getting unsolicited phone calls from around the country, from fellow bankers who were themselves worried about where things were headed.

“Wild speculation was under way in the financial markets and in banking,” Coldwell said. “Some bankers were calling me, saying, ‘Look, Phil, this thing is getting out of hand. You’ve got to do something.’ I said, ‘I wish you’d talk to some of the other governors.’”

The new vice chairman was alarmed too. “Every day you got this sense that the world was coming apart at the seams,” Fred Schultz said. “You saw it in every market. There was a genuine flight from the currency—people investing in tangibles, art, jewelry, stamps, gold. Everything that was tangible was increasing in value. It was just a textbook case.”

Only one of the Federal Reserve governors had had personal experience with hyperinflation, when prices double or triple in a single year or even in a single month. Henry Wallich had been a small boy in Germany during the early 1920s when the German currency was rendered worthless by hyperinflation, when prices doubled almost daily and citizens literally had to transport their cash in wheelbarrows. The experience was the political trauma that, coupled with the defeat in World War I, destabilized German society and paved the way for the rise of Nazism and Adolf Hitler. Despite the anxieties of others, Wallich did not himself really believe that America was on the brink of such a disaster. Even if U.S. inflation soared to 20 or 25 percent, that would still not be anything like what Germany had gone through.

“I used to say that I never, never thought this could happen in the United States,” Wallich explained puckishly. “But now I only say one ‘never.’”

Whatever the numbers showed, it seemed obvious to the Fed that it had to do something more. Governor Coldwell compared the Fed’s role in the financial system to a traffic cop at a busy intersection.

“Every once in a while,” Coldwell said, “the Fed flicks on the yellow light and people react the way drivers in Washington react to a yellow light—they speed up and get through the intersection. Then the Fed has to flick on the red light, and when it hits red, people come to a screeching stop—after a few of them try to run the light.”

The metaphor described the moment. Governors who had been cautious and uncertain a few weeks earlier were now changing their minds. Paul Volcker was talking to them one by one, coaxing them toward a new consensus. It was time, the chairman said, to flick on the red light.

The bald little professor with the elfin face and the tart tongue seemed a quixotic figure at first, as he trudged cheerfully from one congressional hearing to another with his improbable arguments. No one questioned Milton Friedman’s scholarly brilliance, but his ideas seemed hopelessly out-of-date. The press called him an “intellectual radical.” Paul Samuelson of MIT, an eminence in the Keynesian orthodoxy that reigned over economics, likened him to “a man with a foil attacking a battleship.”15

In 1963, the University of Chicago economist had published with coauthor Anna J. Schwartz the magnum opus of his career, A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-1960. To professionals, Friedman’s work was an awesome piece of scholarship, a dense tome that traced in meticulous detail the entire course of money, banking and U.S. monetary policy from Ulysses S. Grant to John F. Kennedy.16 To most politicians in Washington, Milton Friedman seemed just a figure with an odd obsession. He kept reappearing in academic and political forums, preaching the same profoundly conservative sermon: the Keynesian orthodoxy that had dominated economics for thirty years was wrong. Not just a little wrong, Friedman insisted, but totally, fundamentally, disastrously wrong.

Many were bemused by his feisty persistence; few took his message seriously at first. Friedman had begun his proselytizing, after all, in the early 1960s, the era of practical triumph for the liberal intellectual inheritors of John Maynard Keynes, the great British economist. The Democratic Administrations of Kennedy and Johnson were aggressively applying the lessons elaborated by Keynes during the Great Depression—that is, manipulating the federal government’s own budget in order to stimulate growth in the private economy. Either by cutting taxes or increasing federal spending or doing both, the government could* augment the aggregate demand of the private economy, the total spending power of consumers and businesses. In essence, the government put more money in people’s pockets—either by taxing them less or giving them cash subsidies or buying more of whatever they had to sell, whether it was labor or paving cement or surplus wheat. The increased aggregate demand induced by Washington would ripple through the private economy and multiply. The newly hired construction worker bought a new car and the auto factory purchased more steel to make cars and the steel mill hired more workers. Rising incomes and profits stimulated buying and selling, production and employment.

Since the government was pumping out more money than it collected in tax revenue, the strategy naturally produced temporary deficits in the federal budget, a source of constant alarm to conservatives. The liberal architects of the “New Economics” argued persuasively— at least persuasively to the political majority—that engineered deficits were therapeutic. The increased economic activity stimulated by federal fiscal policy would more than compensate for the budget shortfall. The increased demand for goods led wealth owners and corporations to invest in new factories, the process of capital formation that was the heart of economic growth. Expanding production meant more jobs and rising personal incomes, broadly distributed in the society. As a consequence, the revenue base of the federal government—all the workers and businesses that pay taxes—would be permanently enlarged.

The New Economics worked. In fact, it produced spectacular returns. The unemployment rate, which was nearly 7 percent when Kennedy took office, began to fall dramatically as the tax-and-spending policies took hold. The American economy entered a long cycle of robust expansion, and unemployment fell below 5 percent, then below 4 percent, where it remained for four years. Eventually, it dropped to only 3.5 percent, the practical equivalent of full employment in America, a job for everyone who wanted to work.

Milton Friedman, meanwhile, worried about inflation. He testified frequently before Congress and patiently instructed important committee chairmen on why they should worry too. At the time, it seemed an odd complaint, even cranky. The Consumer Price Index rose by modest increments each year, but never by as much as 2 percent through 1965. Wealthy bond investors might grumble when the inflation rate hit 1.5 percent, but the rest of the country was more impressed by the general prosperity. Friedman persisted, nevertheless, with his dire predictions.

As a libertarian conservative, Friedman objected fundamentally to nearly any form of government intrusion in the natural functionings of the private marketplace. But he had a more pointed quarrel with the Keynesian perspective that then dominated political thinking. Fiscal policy, the budget choices that Keynesians thought so important, produced only ephemeral results, Friedman insisted. The fundamental source of government influence over the private economy was its control of money—the monetary policy made by the Federal Reserve. The Fed’s manipulation of the money supply, Friedman added, was consistently destabilizing and damaging.

To mainstream economists in the sixties, including many who worked at the Federal Reserve, Friedman’s essays and lectures at first sounded quaint. His basic ideas were not actually new, as they recognized. Friedman was essentially asking the political community to renounce all that it had learned from Franklin Roosevelt’s New Deal. He was audaciously attempting to rehabilitate classical economic doctrines from the nineteenth century, the faith in free markets and an abhorrence of government intrusion. These ideas had themselves been the orthodox wisdom for generations of economists, businessmen and political leaders—until they were brutally discredited by events.

The seminal events that destroyed the old ideology were the Crash of 1929 and the Great Depression that followed. Classical economics taught that free markets would always seek and find a natural equilibrium, a self-correcting capacity that revived production and employment, once prices and wages fell low enough. In the Great Depression, the American economy did not revive. Neither did the rest of the world’s. Year after year, as the social misery deepened and massive unemployment stretched on for more than a decade, the popular faith in free markets was shattered. Somewhat haphazardly, the New Deal advanced a new creed: an activist national government must intervene to overcome the shortcomings and weaknesses of private enterprise. This new idea—government’s obligation to manage the economy— was legitimized by the national trauma of Depression, embraced both in public opinion and in scholarly theory.

Friedman’s old-fashioned preoccupation with the money supply collided with a corollary lesson taught by the Depression years. The new generation of economists, who proudly called themselves Keynesians, concluded from the experience of the thirties that the money supply was not a reliable tool for stimulating growth in the economy. Fiscal policy—taxes and spending—was much more potent and direct. After all, the nation was awash with excess liquidity, an overabundance of savings, during the Depression years. The problem, crudely stated, was not a shortage of money—the problem was that people were afraid to spend it. If consumers would not buy, then capital owners would not invest in new factories or rehire the unemployed. Everyone held back, and the cycle of caution and contraction fed on itself. As the Keynesians’ cliche put it, trying to revive the economy by expanding the money supply was like “pushing on a string.”

In this contest of ideas, therefore, Friedman’s book brilliantly reargued the historical record of the Depression and insisted that the conventional analysis was mistaken. Friedman found that both the original collapse of 1929 and the long contraction of the real economy were probably caused and certainly exacerbated by the Federal Reserve’s failure to provide an adequate money supply. In the debates among economists, the Friedman position was summarized with a new cliche: “money matters.”

None of this intellectual combat would have counted for much in the lives of ordinary Americans if the good times of the sixties had continued. Milton Friedman might have remained obscure and lonely, an eccentric thinker living in the wrong age. Instead, he won the Nobel Prize for economics in 1976. He became, if not a celebrity, at least widely celebrated as a prophet. Bright young graduate students listened to their Keynesian professors and then to Friedman, and some began calling themselves “monetarists,” the label applied to his disciples. Wall Street analysts followed the money numbers more closely, the weekly fluctuations of M-l, and concluded, just as Friedman had said, that M-l was a more reliable predictor of economic swings than the changing federal budget. Many executives of important banks and corporate economists were converted too, along with reporters and editors in the financial press. Eventually, the converts included important political figures in Washington, even liberal politicians.

Over a decade, starting in the mid-1960s, a remarkable transformation took place in elite opinion—a kind of counter-reformation that rose to challenge the hegemony of the Keynesian liberals. More than anyone else, Friedman was its leader. Each generation, it seemed, discovered new truth from its own experience and discarded competing truths from the past. When the tide of events shifted, the collective wisdom shifted with it, sometimes rediscovering what the previous generation had forgotten. Back in the 1930s, with his usual drollery, Keynes had observed that political leaders were, unaware, “the slaves of some defunct economist.” Now, the monetarists claimed, Keynes himself was the defunct economist.

The challenge of monetarism, the new respectability of money as a central factor in economic policy, flowed from a single disturbance, a new economic trauma confronting the nation—the rise of price inflation. In 1966, the nation was alarmed when the Consumer Price Index increased more than 3 percent, the steepest inflation in fifteen years. By 1969, the annual rate of price increases was above 6 percent. With a brief recession followed by the wage-and-price controls imposed by Richard Nixon, the inflation rate subsided for a time, but still remained about 3 percent. By 1973, prices were escalating rapidly again and the CPI rose by a new postwar record, 8.8 percent. The following year, 1974, OPEC pushed up oil and the price level rose 12.2 percent.17

The presumed remedy was a long and deep recession, an economic contraction induced by tight monetary policy from the Federal Reserve. As recession continued for fifteen months, the unemployment rate rose to a peak of 9.1 percent; the nation’s industrial production shrank by nearly 15 percent.18 Yet, when the economy recovered and resumed its growth, so did inflation. Indeed, the disorders got worse: the rate of inflation rose toward double digits again but the economy never returned to anything resembling full employment. In the Keynesian analysis, these twin aggravations—inflation and high unemployment—were not supposed to occur simultaneously.

What exactly was causing this modern spiral of inflation? Many explanations were proffered, indeed, a bewildering variety of different answers came from the economists. Lyndon Johnson was blamed for overstimulating the economy when it was already at its maximum capacity—adding tens of billions in new spending for the war in Indochina to the federal budget alongside the burgeoning new Great Society spending for education, health and poverty. The Arab sheiks and OPEC were blamed for the oil price shocks of 1973 and later. Workers and labor unions were implicated for demanding wage increases that exceeded the increase in their productivity; corporate managers were accused of giving in too easily to labor’s demands and passing on the cost in the price of their products. All of these diffuse factors were relevant to the inflation, yet the very complexity was unsatisfying. Who exactly was to blame? The standard explanations from economists seemed to blame everyone, a bit, and no one singularly.

Milton Friedman offered a much simpler answer to the question: inflation was caused by the Federal Reserve.

His scholarly dictum, often quoted, was actually an accusation: “Inflation is everywhere and anywhere a monetary phenomenon.” In translation, that meant: price inflation could not have occurred if the Federal Reserve had not provided excessive amounts of money to the economy. Instead, Friedman said, the Federal Reserve swerved back and forth irresponsibly—supplying too much money and causing inflation, then tightening the money supply abruptly, which choked off the economy and produced recession.

His solution was radical. Congress should strip the Fed of its privileged independence and enact legislative instructions for U.S. monetary policy. The Fed must be compelled to accept a simple rule governing its functions: from week to week, month to month, year to year, without deviation, the money supply should be expanded at a fixed rate, somewhere around 3 percent a year for the basic aggregate, M-l. Thus, money growth would be held to the historic average growth rate for the national economy and would avoid the sharp swings. Private business, financial markets and consumers could then count on a stable future, instead of lurching back and forth from inflation to recession. A monetary rule, Friedman explained, would not eliminate the natural highs and lows of the business cycle, but it would moderate them—and guarantee that government intrusion did not make things worse.

The core of Friedman’s doctrine was, in fact, a profoundly conservative statement on human expectations. It reformulated, in the language of economics, the ancient myth of Icarus and Daedalus, in which man tried to escape the bounds of his earthly limitations—flying too close to the sun—and tragedy resulted. Monetarism rested on the same belief, that human society would be better off if it modestly accepted limits for itself. Economic aspirations should not attempt to accomplish more than the historical average of economic growth compiled by the past. There were natural limits to what could be expected from life. If democratic ambitions tried to push the economy beyond those limits, chaos and disorder would follow.

The monetarist prescription, a fixed rule for money, was an alluring solution to the instabilities of inflation, and many rushed to embrace it, but it begged an important question: if Friedman was correct, why didn’t the Federal Reserve follow such a rule itself? The Fed portrayed itself as the governing institution most dedicated to the goal of stable prices. If a fixed rate of money growth was the obvious answer, was it plausible that the Federal Reserve would persistently refuse to adopt it?

Friedman had an explanation:

The Federal Reserve System is a political institution, and like every political institution, it is seeking to retain its own power, its own decisions, its own prestige. To what end do politicians want to maintain their positions? To what end does a CEO of a business concern want to run that concern for profit? Because the coin he is interested in is both income and power. In the same way, people who are in the Fed want to maintain their position. Their coin is influence and power.

A strict money rule, if faithfully followed, would make their decisions for them. The Federal Open Market Committee would not have to meet every six or eight weeks in deep secrecy to deliberate on the new economic developments and how it should respond to them.

Let’s suppose that over the last thirty years the Federal Reserve System had followed the policies I’ve been recommending [Friedman mused]. They had produced a steady, stable rate of growth in the quantity of money. I assure you the economy would have been vastly better off. There never would have been a major inflation. There would have been milder business cycles. We would have still had business cycles, but they would have been mild. But all that the Fed would have been doing is making sure that the money supply rose by 3 percent a year.

Is there a chance in the world, under those circumstances, that the chairman of the Federal Reserve would be chosen in a public-opinion poll as the second most important person in the country? The Federal Reserve would be a minor service agency of government. Nobody would know that

they had been enormously influential in producing these good results. From a purely political point of view, that would have been a stupid policy for them to follow and that’s why they haven’t followed it.

In one dimension, Friedman’s conservative critique of the Fed resembled the liberal complaints of the Texas Populist congressman Wright Patman. The Federal Reserve, he contended, assiduously served the interests of one important constituency—the commercial banks—and the political power of the banks was used, in turn, to protect the independent status of the Fed. “If I said to you, ‘Here I’ve got a major sector of the economy in which no enterprise ever fails, no one ever goes broke,’ you would tell me, ‘My God, there must not be any competition there,’” Friedman said. “That’s correct. The banking industry has been a highly protected, sheltered industry. That’s because the banks have been the constituency of the Federal Reserve.”

Only public indignation could alter any of this, Friedman believed. The bureaucratic mentality of the Fed was stubbornly devoted to protecting its own discretionary powers. “They are important people,” he said. “It’s impossible for them to believe that they are doing harm by being important—and that they would do more good by being clerks.”

In the privacy of his office, a Federal Reserve governor spoke with uncharacteristic heat in his voice. “I don’t understand why the financial press has such a monetarist bias,” the governor said bitterly. “The monetarists are the chiropractors of modern economics.”

In public, the Fed’s contempt for its monetarist critics was usually concealed by polite technical arguments. In private, most of the senior officials of the Federal Reserve shared the sense of frustration that so many were “taken in” by the Friedman argument. In their view, the monetarists swept away all of the complexities of central banking and blithely pretended they did not matter—questions about the definition of money itself, about seasonal fluctuations in the public’s need for money, about the external forces that reverberated through the banking system and the real economy. The Federal Reserve tried to adjust for all these and other influences on the money supply. That was the essence of what the Federal Open Market Committee debated every other month; that was why they thought it was impossible to supply the same amount of reserves each week, each month, without adjusting for change. Human society, in other words, did not proceed by neat historical averages. As Governor Henry Wallich stated:

Milton Friedman implies that there are no fluctuations in the real economy that need affect monetary policy—no investment boom, no housing boom, no oil shocks. We should simply supply a steady growth of money.

The Fed feels it has to smooth out reserves, adjust for seasonal influences. Monetarists say that none of this is necessary. Monetarists say, “The markets will learn to adjust to this—those who were right will prosper, those who were wrong will be punished.” I say, “If you accept that, eventually you will have only those left who are wise and prosperous and everyone else will be ruined.”

The Fed was enormously vulnerable, however. Fed economists could make technical arguments against the rigidity of Friedman’s proposal for a monetary rule. But the reality of the last fifteen years was irrefutable: price inflation had steadily escalated and this could not have happened if the Federal Reserve had not allowed it to happen.

In public, Federal Reserve officials were defensive and evasive. Privately, inside the System, even governors who despised Friedman’s caustic attacks had to concede his larger point: in the long run, one way or another, the Fed had at the very least acquiesced to inflation. Either through honest error or by lack of will, the Fed had provided more money than was actually required by the economy.

Lyle E. Gramley, a former research director at the Fed who would be appointed to the Board of Governors by President Carter in the spring of 1980, was one of the most respected senior economists from the System. And Gramley did not deny the Federal Reserve’s culpability:

When you look back over the past fifteen years, you find that inflation kept getting worse. It got worse for a whole variety of reasons, but certainly one of them was that the course of monetary policy over this long period had permitted too rapid an increase in money and credit. I don’t think that monetary policy was the principal initiating force of inflation. I think it was things like the way we financed the Vietnam War, the oil price shocks in the 1970s, the tremendous increase in government regulations on the environment and the workplace. But, you know, if over twenty years inflation accelerates a lot, you have to say that a good bit of the responsibility has to fall ultimately on the conduct of monetary policy.

The Fed’s diligent management of money was complicated by a fundamental political dilemma—the impact of its actions unfolded unevenly in the real economy, which encouraged hesitation and error. As most economists agreed, the first consequence of a substantial increase in the money supply was positive—a surge in economic activity. The negative impact of excessive money growth would not be felt until much later—increased inflation.

The economists disagreed among themselves over how long these two different effects lagged behind the original policy action by the Fed. Some monetarists, for instance, insisted that the relationship was quite predictable: money growth stimulated more output in the real economy within three to six months, but the benefits would be wiped out relatively soon by the subsequent inflation, perhaps nine months or a year later. Others argued that it was not so neat and simple, that the lag time varied from season to season, depending on many other factors besides money. In any case, the mismatch in timing confronted the Fed with a permanent tension in its decision making: it could always produce pleasure in the short run—but at the risk of causing disorder later on.

The temptation was obvious: the Federal Open Market Committee could provide short-term gratification and hope that the negative consequences did not materialize in the long term. As Philip Coldwell observed:

We’re not that tolerant of governors in our society. You build a governor in an automobile to limit the speed and someone’s going to find a way to wire around it because he wants to go faster. No President is going to be satisfied with 3 percent growth in the economy, even when you explain to him that over the long term things will be fine for everyone with 3 percent growth. He says: “I’ll go for 5 percent growth and let the next guy settle for 3 percent.”

The general indictment, supported by many years of evidence, was that the Federal Reserve had yielded too easily and too often to the short-run aspirations. Lyle Gramley believed that this behavior did not stem from political pressures on the Fed from the White House or Congress, but from the common mind-set of the policy makers. “The Federal Reserve shared the beliefs of the economic profession and the aspirations of the public,” Gramley said.

The sober reassessment of attitudes inside the System was not at all apparent to outsiders in the autumn of 1979. As a political institution, the Fed felt embattled, surrounded by critics. To them, the Fed seemed obstinate and arrogant, stubbornly refusing to change its methods despite the accumulated evidence oi failure. “Monetary control remains a marginal concern basically alien to the Federal Reserve bureaucracy’s tradition,” the Shadow Open Market Committee declared. The Shadow Committee was a rump forum for monetarist economists from banking and academia who met regularly to issue withering critiques of the Fed’s performance.19

But the Federal Reserve was under attack from liberals too. In an era of runaway inflation, an outcry from conservatives was natural.

They were the traditional advocates of “hard money,” the defenders of capital and the wealthy citizens whose financial assets were being eroded by inflation. Oddly enough, however, many liberal Democrats in Congress found common cause with the conservative doctrine of monetarism. While they never claimed the label, Democrats joined Republicans in pressuring Fed officials to move toward the operating methods advocated by Friedman and his allies—strict and steady control over the basic money aggregate, M-l. A labor-liberal Democrat like Representative Henry Reuss of Wisconsin, who succeeded Wright Patman as chairman of the House Banking Committee, pushed a monetarist approach. Even Patman himself in his last years was drawn to it.

“I was always amazed at the liberal Democrats who fell for the monetarist line,” said Daniel Brill, the Fed’s retired research director, “because it put them on the wrong side of their own political position.”

Despite the contradiction, members of Congress had an appealing motive for embracing the monetarist critique, especially liberal Democrats who had promoted the great expansion of federal budgets. If the Federal Reserve was actually to blame for inflation, then Congress was absolved. If stable prices were simply a question of careful monetary management by the Federal Reserve, that deflected criticism from the free-spending fiscal policies of the executive and legislative branches—the perennial federal deficits of the sixties and seventies and the accumulating national debt. For many in Congress, the comforting notion that they were innocent and someone else was the culprit fed their righteous indignation toward the Fed.

The congressional agitation for monetarism produced an ironic token of how much the mainstream political opinion had shifted. The Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of 1978, better known as the Humphrey-Hawkins Act, was the last legislative gasp of the Keynesian persuasion, a doomed effort by Senator Hubert Humphrey and other liberal stalwarts to refocus government policy on the suffering of jobless workers. By the time the law was finally enacted, it was an empty symbol; the liberal content had been thoroughly eviscerated.

But the Humphrey-Hawkins Act contained one substantive reform —a monetarist provision ordering the Federal Reserve to make public its annual target ranges for growth in the three monetary aggregates, the three Ms. The Federal Reserve chairman would be required to appear twice a year before House and Senate banking committees to explain these goals and any deviations from the targets. This was intended to give Congress a better handle for oversight, a way to make sure the Fed kept its word on controlling the money supply. Liberal cosponsors ignored the irony, but conservative insiders were amused:

their ascendant doctrine of monetarism was riding to victory on the legislative carcass of the fading orthodoxy of Keynes.20

In addition to the Fed’s outside critics, the enemy was also within the gates. Over the years, the St. Louis Federal Reserve Bank had made itself into a kind of guerrilla outpost for monetarism within the Federal Reserve System. Its research director, Homer Jones, was a teacher of Friedman’s and had recruited a staff of research economists eager to critique the “home office” in Washington and oppose its operating strategy. A succession of presidents at the St. Louis Fed were, likewise, regular nettles inside the Federal Open Market Committee—preaching heretical doctrine directly to the church fathers.

Lawrence K. Roos was a commercial banker who served three terms as the elected county executive in St. Louis before his appointment as president of the St. Louis Fed in 1976. “When I took the job,” Roos said, “I didn’t know a monetarist from a Keynesian, but I was given basic training quick and felt the monetarist approach made sense to me.”

Roos’s monetarist speeches became predictable features of the FOMC meetings, eliciting occasional snickers and some irritation from his colleagues. He complained that the Fed refused to set long-term goals and stick to them. He criticized the deliberate obfuscation, the bewildering variety of economic yardsticks that other FOMC members used to justify their decisions. “Even though it’s a central bank and central banks love to be secretive and mysterious, I think the Fed should tell the American public where it intends to be in two years, its long-range goals for prices, for output and other things. Instead, you name it and the Fed makes a speech saying that’s what it wants too. They really represent a wish list for achieving utopia.”

The conflicting philosophies were concretely reflected in competing computer models. Since 1970, the Fed had operated an elaborate econometric model that attempted to forecast the effects of monetary policy and other influences on the American economy. Computer models were essentially a series of mathematical equations linked together in a fashion that allowed them to work through the myriad of variables and report the theoretical consequences. If the money supply increased by 4 percent a month, how would that alter employment, prices, interest rates six months or a year from now? The model worked the numbers through the equations and printed out answers. The Federal Reserve Board’s computer model in Washington kept adding sophistication to its analysis, growing eventually to more than 160 equations, including everything from oil prices to housing starts. The monetarists at the St. Louis Fed designed their own model of the economy—it contained only eight equations. Money mattered more than anything else. At each meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee, the central staff would provide forecasts based, in part, on its complicated econometric model. Roos delivered contrary results from the monetarists’ computer.

Governor Philip Coldwell, who like Wallich was a “hawk” on tight money but disdainful of monetarism, was less rankled by Roos’s dissents than some other governors.

For some governors [Coldwell said], this was really a fighting matter. Every time a St. Louis man left office, one or two governors would come to me and say, “By God, we’re not to let another monetarist in there this time.” I’d say, “Well, what’s the matter with having one bank out of twelve that is monetarist? Sure, they’re obnoxious and they argue a bit too loudly, but that is one view that ought to be represented.” St. Louis never created a big problem for me. We could always outvote him.

Over time, this was less and less true. The presidents of other Reserve Banks were drawn toward the monetarist camp too—Robert Black of Richmond, John Balles of San Francisco, Monroe Kimbrel of Atlanta and occasionally others. The other presidents were less doctrinaire, less predictable than Roos, but they too found the Friedman case compelling. If the Federal Reserve did not do anything else, it at least ought to get control over the money aggregates.

“Your little monetarist clique,” another FOMC member said of them contemptuously. Nevertheless, they were present and voting and their side was growing stronger. Like it or not, the new Federal Reserve chairman would have to deal with the monetarists.

The thicket of competing theories from economists was most intimidating to outsiders. Otherwise intelligent citizens, who did not have a graduate degree in economics, were bullied into silence. They were compelled to listen passively to the heated arguments among experts, barely able to understand the language of the debate, much less to make a reasoned judgment about which side was right and which was wrong. This barrier of ignorance deformed every political question that required economic expertise, benumbing the normal debate with scientific abstractions.

But many questions of the political economy could be approached in a simpler fashion, an alternative approach that skirted the opaque language of the economists and sought broader answers. The alternative approach was through history: what did the American past reveal about inflation that might help citizens understand their own experience?

On this subject, memory could be misleading. Every generation looked backward with nostalgia, imagining a past when life was simpler and less troubled and, certainly, cheaper. The longing was expressed in the famous quip: “What this country needs is a good five-cent cigar.” Modern Americans could remember fondly a time in their own lives when movies cost 50 cents and Hershey bars sold for a dime and a family-sized Chevrolet could be bought for less than $3,000.

The nostalgia for lower prices obscured the actual history of inflation. In the late 1970s, when prices were rising at the fastest pace in twenty years, this was not the worst of times. Inflation in 1979 averaged more than 13 percent, which was alarming, but not so bad as 1947 when the inflation rate was 14.4 percent or 1918 when it was more than 17 percent or 1864 when inflation hit 27 percent.

The American past was not placid and golden. Prices were usually either rising or falling and could have damaging consequences either way. In the entire history of the United States, there were only a few brief eras of what might be called “price stability.” Each of those episodes was disastrous for many ordinary citizens—prices and incomes were too low.

If a historian examined the data on prices across the entire sweep of American history, an obvious pattern was visible. What caused inflation? The recurring experience of inflationary spirals strongly suggested that the underlying source of these traumas lay not in economics but in politics—the choices made by government or, more precisely, choices that the government refused to make. This was not a matter of the government deciding in a deliberate fashion to ignite an explosion of price increases, yet the periodic bursts of extreme inflation clearly flowed from the government’s decisions.

Through the decades of U.S. history, the price index rose and fell, usually by moderate degree, but there were six distinct episodes when prices escalated abruptly—periods that look like sharp upward spikes on a historical chart of U.S. inflation (see Appendix A, U.S. prices from 1800 to 1986). A historian would ask: what happened in those periods to cause these inflationary spikes?

The first one followed the birth of the Republic, the inflationary frenzy that came after the Revolutionary War. This was before reliable data on prices were collected, but the trauma was still remembered in a colloquial expression—“not worth a Continental.” The second spike of inflation occurred in 1813-1814 after the young nation had fought and won another war with the British, the War of 1812. The third and sharpest explosion of inflation came in the 1860’s. Lincoln was President and the nation was embroiled in its bloody, costly Civil War.

The next dramatic burst of inflation followed immediately after World War I. A fifth spike occurred at the end of World War II. The final one—the beginning of the contemporary inflation—was associated with the war in Vietnam. In all but the last two instances, each rapid run-up of inflation was followed by long and painful periods of deflation, eras when prices fell drastically. Deflation was unknown to modern Americans, except for those elderly citizens who remembered the economic facts of the Great Depression in the thirties, but falling prices produced a much more severe version of suffering and dislocation, failed banks and businesses, farm foreclosures, widespread unemployment and impoverishment.

These simple facts of history suggested a straightforward answer to the question: virulent inflation resulted when the country went to war. That did not explain, of course, why this was so, and the details were different in each instance. But all the inflationary episodes followed the same pattern of behavior by the government—it mobilized the country and the economy by spending vastly more money than it collected in taxes. In each case, from the Revolution to World War II, from Lincoln to Lyndon Johnson, the national government saw itself confronted with a threat to national survival. In those circumstances, government did what it would not have dared to do in other times—it spent far beyond its means, whatever it thought was needed to win the war, pushing aside the problem of how to pay for the war. It would deal with the economic consequences afterward.

The political choices in wartime were always unattractive. In theory, the government could simply raise taxes high enough to pay for the war, but that would undermine popular support for the struggle. Lincoln, Wilson, Roosevelt and Johnson all raised war taxes, but all of them declined to finance the war primarily from tax revenue. Just as Lyndon Johnson feared that a tax increase would turn the American public against the military conflict in Vietnam, Abraham Lincoln worried that additional taxes would deepen the suffering and sacrifice in the Civil War, further aggravating the opposition. It seemed bizarre to equate Lincoln’s struggle to preserve the Union with Lyndon Johnson’s doomed venture in Indochina, but the relevant point was that the financial consequences were similar.

For every great crisis of national security, the federal government borrowed the money to pay for the wars. It would accumulate huge wartime deficits in the federal budget and sell Treasury bonds to cover the new debt. In Lincoln’s case, the solution was much more direct: the national government simply printed new money, nearly $500 million in a new currency called “greenbacks,” and spent it.

The immediate result in every instance was dramatic economic growth and an explosive burst of inflation afterward. It was easy to see the historical connection, but not so easy to explain how the government’s fiscal actions were transmitted into prices. Economists argued among themselves on how the linkage worked. Some pointed to the postwar pressures on the real economy. When citizens returned to peaceful pursuits, their pent-up demand for domestic goods exceeded the economy’s ability to produce them. The sudden shortages led to higher prices. Others emphasized the role of the money supply— expanded artificially to accommodate the government’s wartime spending and to make possible the massive borrowing that financed it. In the postwar environment, the money supply was simply too ample for the economy and the result was inflation. Like many disputes in economics, it was not necessary for noneconomists to choose one explanation over the other. It was entirely plausible that both were true, that the government’s fiscal policy and its monetary policy interacted with an overexerted economy to produce the spikes of rapid rising prices.

The modern spiral of inflation was unique in one respect—its unprecedented duration—and, therefore, more puzzling. The contemporary run-up of prices started visibly with the Vietnam War in 1966. Yet, unlike the other episodes, it did not halt after a few years and subside. Inflation continued upward for more than a decade—even in peacetime, even when the economy was slack. The inflationary surge of the 1960s and 1970s was not as steep as others in the past, but it persisted and compounded more dramatically than anything that had happened before in the American past.

The Consumer Price Index was calculated as 100 with 1967 prices. By 1970, the price index was at 116. By 1975, it was 161. Four years later, it was 217. During the Civil War, prices doubled in only a few years, but Lincoln was fighting a war. This time, the price level nearly tripled in less than twenty years. And the nation was at peace.

The historical question had to be turned around: what was different about the modern postwar era that produced this unprecedented trend? The plausible answers were essentially political. As economic historian Walt W. Rostow has explained, the end of colonial domination in the world inevitably gave the newly independent nations, most of them poor and undeveloped, somewhat more leverage over the terms of trade with the industrial nations of the West, including the United States. This meant the poorer nations could demand somewhat higher prices for the raw commodities, from copper to coffee, that they sold to the wealthy nations. The most spectacular case of this new reality of global power was, of course, crude oil. Higher costs for imported raw materials naturally pushed domestic prices upward (though most less-developed countries remained in weak bargaining positions and still complained of exploitation by industrial capitalism).

Another new political condition was the still-fresh memory of the Great Depression. After World War II, neither political party wanted to risk repeating the misery of the 1930s, and that collective fear pushed policy makers in the opposite direction—pursuing economic expansion and accepting the risk of inflation. In fact, a modern triumph of the government’s economic management was that after World War II Americans did not have to endure another episode of ruinous deflation, the kind that had always followed previous wars.

There was one other fundamental change: the Cold War with the Soviet Union. After World War II, the U.S. economy never actually returned to a peacetime footing. It demobilized briefly but quickly rearmed for global struggle. For the next three decades, driven by fears of conflict with the Soviets, the United States prepared for war. This was unlike any prior era of peacetime in American history. The armed forces were kept permanently at a strength level consistent with war making, and a burgeoning arsenal of modern weapons was purchased from the defense industrial sector. The government’s defense spending for the Cold War absorbed a permanent share of the economy’s output, boosting employment and incomes but also competing with other desires.

While the U.S remained mobilized, the country also resumed the full domestic prosperity of a nation at peace—producing and consuming consumer goods in unprecedented volume. The standard of living for typical American families reached a level of comfort and even luxury undreamed of by earlier generations, new homes in the suburbs, dazzling appliances in the kitchen, a new car in the garage or perhaps two cars. For a time, modern Americans had the best of both worlds, the pleasures of peace and the economic energy of war.

Notwithstanding inflation and other aggravations, this period would rightly be celebrated as the American era—an extraordinary time of prosperous progress in both social and economic terms. The economic expansion during the postwar years generated an entirely new standard of abundance and equity in American life. Deprivation was not eliminated entirely but greatly reduced and, in prosperous times, the society felt confident enough to address some of its long-standing injustices, racial discrimination in particular. The ambitious economic goals pursued by the federal government were, of course, fully shared by the nation at large. Great multinational corporations were extending their reach around the globe, symbols of America’s new hegemony. The swollen military spending seemed a natural extension of the same impulse. America was the new leader of the world, building the largest arsenal ever imagined, prepositioning American troops in dozens of foreign lands. For many years, it seemed, the United States could indeed afford both war and peace at the same time.

But, in time, the failure to choose between the two caught up with the economy and the government’s balance sheet. It was not simply that federal deficits got larger; the question was more complicated than that. For years, after all, despite new deficits, the total national debt was actually shrinking in real terms compared to the size of the nation’s economy—a sign of health. Each annual budget added modest new deficits to the total outstanding debt, but the economy was growing much faster than the government’s borrowing. In 1945, following the massive deficit spending of World War II, the national debt was 119 percent of the annual Gross National Product. But the burden was shrinking dramatically as the postwar economy expanded robustly. By 1960, the debt was only 58 percent of the GNP. By 1969, it had fallen to 40 percent. In 1974, it was down to 35 percent of the nation’s economic output.

Then the historic trend was reversed. In 1975, for the first time since World War II, the national debt did not decline in relation to the economy. The new trend was mild at first, not nearly as dramatic as the debt generated in wartime, but an odd turn of events would aggravate it. A conservative government would assume power in the 1980s, and instead of moderating the fiscal imbalance as conservative governments were expected to do, it accelerated the trend. The government accumulated deficits much larger than before, and the national debt grew much faster than the economy. By 1984, the debt ratio would rise from a low of 35 percent to about 45 percent of the GNP—back above the level achieved in 1969.21 The government’s balance sheet, in other words, began to resemble the financial conditions normally tolerated only during a war.

The political debates did not focus on these numbers, but they returned again and again to the same fundamental question—an argument over national priorities. The basic choice was between war and peace, a question of political values, not economic theory. The Cold War, it was said, threatened American survival and, therefore, the defense spending must take precedence. Or, conversely, it was argued that the Soviet threat was exaggerated, that military spending was excessive and the government’s resources should be directed to domestic development. Broad factions formed on both sides of the question and struggled for control. But, in practical terms, a political consensus was fashioned between them, an implicit understanding that endured for more than three decades, through conservative and liberal regimes, under Democrats and Republicans. The government would refuse to choose between war mobilization and peacetime spending. It would do both.

“After years of inflation,” Paul Volcker told an audience in the autumn of 1979, “the long run has caught up with us.”22

The message was clear to every member of the Federal Reserve Board, even to those three reluctant governors who had recently voted against even a modest increase in the Discount rate. In the last half of September, their worries about imminent recession were contradicted by the new data on economic output coming in from the Commerce Department. Despite all the forecasts, the economy wasn’t tipping into a contraction; it was accelerating again.

And, despite the Fed’s gradual efforts to slow things down with measured increases in interest rates, the banking system was actually accelerating its lending. Bank credit was expanding at an annual rate of more than 20 percent, and, as Fed officials heard from worried bankers, a lot of that new credit was going into speculative ventures —businesses and individuals borrowing in order to buy things on the rising prices, speculative investments from gold and silver to real estate. They were betting that inflation would drive prices much higher. The smart speculator would then sell the commodities or other tangibles, repay the loans and reap a smart, quick profit.

Speculation did not look like a risky bet: the overall inflation rate was near 13 percent and the price of oil was increasing at an alarming rate of more than 6 percent a month—an annual inflation rate of nearly 80 percent. Gold had jumped 28 percent in value in a single month, reaching a new record of $411 an ounce. The price of silver, in the same period, had increased by a staggering 53 percent, up to $16.89 an ounce.

“The specter of 1929 was raised by me and others,” Governor Cold-well said. “Look, we’re on the verge of going into a hyperinflation in the United States.”

While that sounded much too apocalyptic, the frenzy of borrowing and buying did resemble the potential for a classic speculative bubble, one of those fevers that has occurred periodically in economic history. The marketplace loses touch with real value and plunges forward in an orgy of acquisition. Whether it is stocks or bonds, corner lots in big cities or undeveloped swampland in Florida, speculative bubbles all derive from one conviction: the buyers are convinced that in a few days or weeks or months they will become sellers and unload their purchase at a profit. Bubbles always collapsed eventually; the fever broke and prices fell drastically. Then speculators were forced to sell at a loss. They failed and so would banks that lent them money to take their gambles. That is approximately what happened to Wall Street in 1929, when the bubble of financial speculation burst and the stock market collapsed.

It was in this anxious setting that the Federal Reserve chairman began to call on the other governors, one by one, to try out his new idea. Early in his tenure, Volcker had directed the senior staff to begin technical studies on changing the Fed’s basic operating method, and after the embarrassment of the board’s 4-3 vote on September 18, Volcker pushed the idea more aggressively. Some of his colleagues were taken aback. The new chairman was not just advocating a fundamental change in the way the Federal Open Market Committee regulated the money supply. He was proposing a monetarist solution —the approach advocated by the Fed’s angriest critics.

When Volcker dropped by Henry Wallich’s office, Wallich told him in his polite but blunt manner that he opposed the chairman’s proposition. Wallich’s office, down the marble corridor and around the corner from Volcker’s, was dark and jumbled compared to the others, cluttered with random stacks of staff papers and books, smelling faintly of old cigar smoke. Wallich read by a low lamp on his desk, constantly fondling a long cigar. He sometimes wore a green eyeshade, the kind that bookkeepers once used, to protect his weak vision. The eldest governor resembled a genially eccentric professor, enjoying the solitude of his lair, a shuttered study lined with books.

The other governors’ offices were brighter and less forbidding than Wallich’s, but all of them, including Volcker’s, seemed more suited to the academic life than to powerful decision makers of government. Each had a wall of bookshelves and a fireplace handsomely faced in black marble, usually with a sofa and chairs grouped around it. Normally, the board chairman did not lobby the other governors in the privacy of their offices; the collegial ethic of the Federal Reserve Board presumed a polite distance among its members, in which each governor was to decide policy questions on his own, free of heavy-handed pressure from others. Volcker’s one-on-one visits made hi& point: the chairman considered this a question of extraordinary importance.

“It’s a pact with the devil,” Henry Wallich warned Volcker.

Wallich explained his objections. The Federal Open Market Committee ought to tighten money and credit dramatically, Wallich said, but not by adopting a risky new operating system that would create its own disorders. The monetarists had long urged the Fed to abandon its preoccupation with the level of interest rates and, instead, concentrate solely on the money supply itself and the level of reserves the Fed provided for the banking system. Interest rates would then be allowed to rise or fall automatically in reaction. Wallich thought this would lead to extreme swings in interest rates that would destabilize the financial markets and the real economy.

“If you make interest rates automatic,” Wallich predicted, “you have no influence over where they are. So long as the economy is strong, you restrain money supply and interest rates go up. But, as soon as the economy weakens, you have to let interest rates go down. We first get very high interest rates, then very low interest rates, then high again. Yes, you control the money supply, but interest rates become very volatile.”

“Sometimes,” Volcker replied laconically, “you have to deal with the devil.”

When Volcker called on Philip Coldwell, the other most stalwart “hawk” on the board, Coldwell was as negative as Wallich. He could hardly believe that the new chairman, who he knew was not a true believer, was seriously advocating a monetarist scheme.

“Paul, I don’t understand,” Coldwell said. “You want to shift to a monetarist control?” Volcker said that he did. “Well, I don’t have any sympathy for that at all,” Coldwell said. “It kind of binds our hands. It keeps us from making policy judgments.” Volcker insisted he wanted to try it.

The chairman would actually have been content himself not to change anything fundamental, but simply to push forward with the Fed’s orthodox approach—tightening credit by pushing interest rates up sharply. But the chairman faced an internal political dilemma: members like Coldwell and Wallich were willing, even eager, to drive up interest rates and halt the inflationary spiral. But others like Partee and Teeters and Rice were much more hesitant to vote directly for such drastic action. Could Volcker assemble a sustainable majority that would vote to raise interest rates two points or much more? And keep them there? Would the FOMC members have the nerve, if it were needed, to push up interest rates by as much as three or four points? Nothing that dramatic had ever been executed by Fed policy makers in the past. The answer seemed obvious.

“We could have just tightened,” Volcker acknowledged, “but I probably would have had trouble getting policy as much tighter as it needed to be. I could have lived with a more orthodox tightening, but I saw some value in just changing the parameters of the way we did things.”

The monetarist alternative offered a clever solution to Volcker’s internal political dilemma: it would serve as a veil that cloaked the tough decisions. If the Federal Open Market Committee declared publicly that it was no longer pegging its policy on interest rates, but on the level of M-l, that would obscure its hand and might deflect the public attacks when interest rates rose sharply. Fed members could explain, disingenuously, that the rising interest rates were attributable to “market pressures.” In a narrow sense, that would be correct, but, in a larger sense, an evasion. The “market pressures” that drove up interest rates would derive directly from the Federal Reserve’s own actions to tighten the supply of reserves.

As a Reserve Bank president explained:

Everyone could say: “Look, no hands.” It was easier to do this with a self-imposed, semiautomatic rule than it would be with periodic decisions by the committee. It wasn’t just the perception of outside pressures, but also inside pressures. Internally, nobody really knew how much tightening would be needed to break inflation or how far interest rates would really have to go.

For years, in order to control reserves, the Federal Reserve had dealt with the three Ms obliquely rather than directly. Instead of pegging its policy to the quantity of reserves, it pegged it to the Federal Funds rate, the price that one bank charged when it lent its excess reserves to another bank that was short. In its meetings, the Federal Open Market Committee focused primarily on where to hold this short-term interest rate and then instructed the Open Market Desk in New York to achieve that goal. Each day, as pressures in the money market fluctuated, the Fed managers at the New York desk would buy or sell securities, injecting or withdrawing reserves, in order to keep the Fed Funds rate at the chosen level.

When the Fed Funds rate was raised, it signaled tighter credit availability to all the players and, therefore, was expected to discourage further credit expansion. When banks saw the Fed Funds rate going up, they were supposed to moderate their own lending—or else pay dearly in the money market to raise the required reserves. If the banks did not respond accordingly, the Federal Open Market Committee would move its target for the Fed Funds rate higher and hope that the banking system got the message.

To monetarists, this was backwards. The Fed, they complained, employed a permissive, indirect approach that constantly left it reacting to events after the fact. A simple, straightforward method would be much more effective—directly targeting the quantity of reserves it intended to provide, then sticking to that target.

Milton Friedman, the master teacher, provided a lucid illustration of why the monetarists thought the Fed was wrong:

Suppose I want to control the number of automobiles produced in the United States. There are two ways in which I can do it. I can say, “I’m going to try to figure out at what price people would buy so many automobiles. Then I’m going to peg the price at that level and I’ll sell all the automobiles I want. If I find they are buying more than I want, I’ll raise the price.”

Then there’s another way. I can say, “Well, you can’t make automobiles without steel. I will limit the total amount of steel that’s available to build automobiles and then let the price of autos turn out to be whatever it turns out to be.” Those are both ways in which you can ultimately limit the number of automobiles produced.

Exactly the same is true with respect to the quantity of money. One way to limit the quantity of money is to say, “Let me try to figure at what interest rate people want to hold a quantity of money equal to the amount I want to make available.” Then I will try to set the interest rate at that level. Or I can say, “The raw material of making loans is reserves—high-powered money. How much high-powered money is required to support the quantity of money I want to see out there?” I will provide that quantity of high-powered money. That’s like producing that amount of raw steel.

In principle, if I knew enough, the two approaches would be identical. I’d pick the same answer. But, in practice, I don’t know enough. It would be clear to you that it’s a lot easier to control the number of automobiles by limiting the amount of steel than it is by trying to guess what the hell the price should be. I think the same thing is true in the money market.

There was one thing wrong with Friedman’s metaphor—banks aren’t automobile companies, money is not steel. The daily expansion or contraction of money and credit was neither so easily visible and definable as steelmaking and auto selling nor was it so neatly limited in consequence. If the price of autos fluctuated suddenly, that affected auto sales. If the price of bank reserves changed suddenly, that sent tremors through every credit transaction in the economy, from six-month CDs to auto loans to capital investment in new factories. Friedman’s system might produce smoother control over bank reserves, but it would also create horrendous zigzags in interest rates, as markets bid the price of money up and down.

The Fed, like all central banks, cared a lot about stability. Traditionally, Fed officials had interpreted their legal mandate to include a responsibility for maintaining “orderly markets.” Put another way, they felt obligated to avoid actions that might destabilize the vast and complicated machinery of finance. In practice, when the Fed tightened or eased, it tried to engineer smooth changes in interest rates that would “nudge” the financial markets in the right direction without shocking them into hysterical overreactions. Monetarists claimed this concern reflected the Fed’s narrow attachment to one special interest, the money-market traders of Wall Street. The Fed’s cautious management of interest rates made life a lot easier for market traders, the monetarists complained, but did not necessarily serve the larger public interest. Nevertheless, the Fed managers traditionally saw the public interest in maintaining stable interest rates and avoiding wild swings that might send wrong messages through the entire economy.

But that was the past. Paul Volcker, though he was schooled as an open-market trader in the Fed bureaucracy and shared its solicitude for “orderly markets,” now wanted to accomplish the opposite: Volcker wanted to shock the banks and financial markets, even put a little fear in their hearts. If Wall Street had lost faith in the Fed’s will to control inflation, how could he convince them? If money-market traders and cynical speculators were persuaded that the Federal Reserve lacked the resolve to break the inflationary spiral, what message would change their minds? An abrupt change in the operating method, one that would disrupt the financial markets’ comfortable assumptions about interest-rate stability, might serve as a therapeutic thunderbolt —an exercise in creative uncertainty.

This approach had another benefit [Volcker explained]. It injected uncertainty into the system, which, at that point, I thought was desirable. There was a general feeling that the Federal Reserve was going to keep interest rates smooth. The Federal Reserve might raise rates, but the market is not going to be volatile. Banks can continue lending and they would always be able to fund their loans at a rate only slightly higher and the Federal Reserve would not intervene. Now, under this approach, there was uncertainty. Banks had to take the risk that interest rates would go against them.

To sharpen the message, Volcker proposed an auxiliary change designed to chasten the most aggressive banks—an added reserve requirement of 8 percent on the funds that banks borrowed to finance their loan expansion. Traditionally, a typical bank, following the standard rules of prudence, depended on its interest-free deposits as the pool of money for making loans; the bank was the financial intermediary that used the money parked by depositors in order to lend to others who needed it. A bank’s expansion of lending was, thus, inhibited by how fast it could attract additional depositors. The old tradition of patience was crumbling.

Over the last two decades, a new go-go spirit had taken hold among American bankers, both in Wall Street and among ambitious regional banks, a driving entrepreneurial zeal for growth. The new spirit was reflected in their architecture. Banks were traditionally designed to look like Greek temples, dour sanctuaries with marble columns, symbols of trust. The new bank buildings of the 1960s and 1970s made a different statement: they were soaring towers of glass and gleaming steel, open and dynamic structures that conveyed a spirit of boldness and optimism. The modern banking buildings reflected the new managerial spirit that had taken hold inside.

American banking had discovered a more aggressive approach to management that evaded the traditional inhibitions of deposit growth, a method for achieving faster growth that appealed especially to the largest and most ambitious banks. Instead of waiting for new deposits, the banks would go ahead and make new loans, then turn around and borrow huge sums themselves, in effect “buying” their deposit base in the money market to finance the expansion of credit. The practice was known as “managed liabilities,” since both the regular deposits and the borrowing done by a bank constitute the liabilities on its balance sheet—money it owes to someone else. Conversely, a bank’s outstanding loans were its assets—the money it will collect from someone else (exactly the reverse of how families or businessmen would describe their balance sheets). Managed liabilities depended on banks issuing such large financial instruments as certificates of deposit and Eurodollar borrowings of $100,000 and in much greater sums. As long as the banks could count on borrowing new funds at a lower interest rate than they charged for lending them out, the interest-rate spread assured their profits.23

Volcker’s proposed shift would disrupt the banks’ confidence in their interest-rate calculations. What if they made loans at 13 percent and short-term interest rates were suddenly going up sharply? They would lose the spread if they themselves had to borrow at higher rates. The marginal reserve requirement of 8 percent would also make the practice of managed liabilities more expensive for the banks. At all but the smallest banks, the Fed’s reserve requirement on the demand deposits in checking accounts was 16.25 percent, but it was much lower or zero on funds raised through large CDs or in the Federal Funds market or the Eurodollar borrowings. Under Volcker’s scheme, banks would have to set aside another 8 percent of their borrowed funds as reserves—sterile money held at their local Federal Reserve Bank where it collected no interest. For every $1 million a bank raised in the money market, it would have to set aside $80,000 in an idle account at the Fed. This would not prohibit them from aggressive lending, but bankers, more than other creatures, detested idle money, funds that were not producing interest income. Above all, Volcker hoped the new reserve requirement might scare the more aggressive banks a bit, make them wonder if the Fed was prepared to do even more later.

When Volcker called on other governors, all these elements were made part of his larger argument: if the Federal Reserve took sufficiently dramatic action, that might produce an important psychological victory. If the financial markets were convinced that at last the Fed was prepared to get tough and stay tough on controlling money, the investors who were demanding an “inflation premium” in interest rates to protect themselves against future inflation might change their thinking. Thus, Volcker argued, the drastic action would certainly push up interest rates across the spectrum of lending, both for short-term credit and long-term investments like corporate and government bonds. But, if the markets became more optimistic about the long-range prospects for curbing inflation, then long-term interest rates should drop back down to more normal levels.

“What I hoped,” Volcker said, “was that there would be a strong reaction in the markets. Interest rates would go up sharply at first, but that would have a favorable impact on inflationary expectations so that long-term rates would start coming down. The sign of psychological success was whether long-term rates would stabilize and start coming down.”

As Volcker made the rounds with his other colleagues, his political dilemma was resolved: the three governors who had been most hesitant about drastic action on interest rates were much more receptive to his proposal. Wallich and Coldwell didn’t like it, but Teeters, Rice and Partee were willing to make the shift, well aware that it meant a sharp spike in interest rates—the action they had been reluctant to take directly.

“Under the new system,” Nancy Teeters observed, “we could say what we were doing was concentrating on the monetary aggregates. It was perfectly obvious to me that if you set the money growth too low, that would send interest rates up. That was never in doubt. The problem with targeting the Fed Funds rate is that you had to set it. This did let us step back a bit.”

Emmett Rice, who had joined the board four months earlier, had questioned interest-rate targeting himself, convinced that it would make more sense to control reserves directly. “I was ready to change it,” Rice said. “Most of us were rather pleased that Paul was willing to bite the bullet.”

Rice also recognized the political cover that the new operating system offered the governors:

This meant you were not directly responsible for what happened to interest rates. This was one of the advantages. If interest rates had to go to 20 percent—and I have to say that nobody thought they would go that high—then this would be the procedure doing it. I wouldn’t call it a cover, but I don’t think anyone on the committee would have been willing to vote to push interest rates as high as 20 percent. This was a way to achieve a result, a more effective way to get there.

Chuck Partee, the other reluctant “dove,” was attracted to the operating shift by a different argument. Partee was not a monetarist himself, but he thought that the monetarist approach might overcome a flaw in the Fed’s institutional reflexes—sticking stubbornly with a strong position too long and causing more damage to the economy than it had intended. Partee had been research director during the long and deep recession of 1974-1975 when the Fed was accused of doing exactly that—holding money and credit tight for so long that it drove the economy into more distress than was necessary, more bankruptcies and more unemployment.

As he said:

It may sound odd, but I would prefer the evenhanded approach of the monetarists. I became very concerned about a mind-set that would lead us right into a recession—get tight and stay tight—and lead us into a recession like the 1930s. I found myself far less hostile to the notion that we might have a fairer approach by targeting the money supply than I was to the idea that we should raise interest rates one time and keep raising them. The problem is, there is also a hesitancy to reduce interest rates once they have been raised. My concern grew out of my reflection on several earlier recessions, particularly 1974-1975. My concern was that we would be slow to respond to weakness and permit a substantial contraction in money and credit to occur. There would be a great chance of that, that we might just get locked into a position of holding tight for a rather extended period.

The automatic quality of the monetarist method promised to avoid that extreme. Presumably, if the economy weakened, the Fed would continue to provide the same supply of reserves, and as the demand fell, the price of money would fall too. Targeting the supply of reserves would, thus, force interest rates higher on an upswing in economic activity, but it would also allow the rates to fall on the downside.

“I considered it a big gamble,” Partee added. “You probably would never take such a big gamble under normal circumstances.”

Now Volcker had his consensus for change. Wallich and Coldwell, though they didn’t like the idea, agreed not to press their objections if this was the only way Volcker could get the others to support a tougher policy. Fred Schultz, the new vice chairman, deferred to Volcker’s judgment on the issue, agreeing that something dramatic had to be done. Volcker believed that this was probably the only way to get the tighter money that he and the “hawks” wanted to see.

Wallich did not argue much. “I was not sure people would do it my way,” he said. “It was probably wise to use a method that produced a consensus for tightening.”

On the last Friday of the month, September 28, the seven governors assembled in the chairman’s office, where they would attract less attention than in the boardroom, to thrash out the final details. Only a few of the senior staff members were included. If even a hint leaked out before the chairman was ready to move, it would send wild rumors through the financial markets. The governors all agreed to support the shift to a new operating method, but there were many questions to settle about how it would operate. The chairman was now confident that he could sell the idea to the Federal Open Market Committee when it next met. He had discussed the proposal with several of the twelve Reserve Bank presidents by telephone, but most of them had no idea of what was in the works. Volcker did not worry about getting their support. Given their enthusiasm for monetarism, the Reserve Bank presidents would be delighted to learn that the home office was finally coming around to their way of thinking.

At the White House, the President did not know anything either. Nor did any of Jimmy Carter’s advisers on economic policy have any idea that the Federal Reserve was preparing a major departure in monetary policy, intended to deliver a psychological shock to the nation’s financial system. As it happened, the President and his staff were busy working up their own anti-inflation initiative. In recent weeks, the White House staff had held uncounted meetings with business executives from major corporations and labor leaders from the AFL-CIO, negotiating a new “accord” on wages and prices that they hoped would moderate the business-labor demands for higher wages, higher prices. White House staffers patiently mediated tendentious discussions over how the voluntary agreement was to be worded, coaxing the labor officials and business leaders to sign. They did not know, of course, that the President’s anti-inflation effort would be rendered irrelevant by the new agreement Paul Volcker had just negotiated three blocks away in the privacy of the Federal Reserve building.

Despite its appearance of aloofness, the Federal Reserve kept in close touch with the many political interests that surrounded it. Paul Volcker met regularly with a wide circle of interest groups and their representatives, even some that were hostile to the Fed and opposed to its policies. On a typical day, the chairman might breakfast with a lobbyist from the Independent Bankers Association, then lunch with an economist from the National Home Builders Association. In the evening, he might drop by a congressional reception where he would pick up casual intelligence from the stream of Washington political gossip.

The chairman’s personality was not well suited to the style of exaggerated chumminess common to Washington luncheons, but neither was he as austere and remote as his public image. Up close, Volcker seemed friendlier and more casual than the imposingly tall man with the big cigar who appeared periodically on the TV news with ominous pronouncements. He asked many questions and something in his rumpled manner allowed others to feel he was listening earnestly to their answers. This was naturally flattering to those who had his ear; an intimate conversation with Paul Volcker was evidence of one’s own importance.

The lawyers, lobbyists and politicians, even some news reporters who encountered him regularly, were likely to sprinkle their conversations with casual references to their recent chat with the Federal Reserve chairman. “As I was telling Paul ...” Seldom did one hear any of these people say: “As Paul was telling me ...” Volcker listened a lot, but did not reveal much about his own thoughts.

But one special-interest group, above all others, had preferred access to the Federal Reserve chairman and the other governors—the six thousand commercial banks that were members of the Federal Reserve System. Four times a year, a committee of twelve bankers, elected by the member banks in each Federal Reserve district, met privately with Volcker and other governors to tell them what they thought of Fed policy and how it should be changed. It was a unique arrangement in the federal government—a regulated industry holding confidential meetings with the regulators to complain and criticize and recommend new policies. If this were another area of regulatory government, airline safety or water pollution or industrial health rules, private conversations between the regulators and the regulated business would be suspect and subject to prompt disclosure. At the Fed, the secrecy of the bankers’ advice was consecrated in the law.

The Federal Advisory Council had inspired suspicions from the start. It was added to the original Federal Reserve legislation of 1913 as a compromise to assuage the disappointed commercial bankers who thought they alone should have control over the new Federal Reserve System. As a sop, the bankers were given a preferred status as official advisers. Since its meetings were kept secret, the Federal Advisory Council figured prominently in many of the conspiracy theories focused on the Fed. This must be the place, people figured, where the bankers tell the Fed what to do.

Federal Reserve officials shrugged off the accusations with an air of resignation. The meetings with the bankers’ council, they said, were useful discussions of banking issues but hardly sinister. After all, Fed officials talked to private bankers all the time and also met with advisory groups of consumers and savings and loan executives.

The official minutes of the Federal Advisory Council revealed a more complicated picture—not sinister perhaps, but not entirely innocent either. The bankers regularly used these private sessions for their own special pleading, repeatedly urging the Fed to be more lenient on them and to adopt more stringent regulations for their competitors.

Among the thousands of small, independent bankers around the nation, many resented the advisory council because it looked to them like a private lobby for the largest banks. In 1979, for instance, the twelve advisory council members included Walter B. Wriston, board chairman of Citibank, second-largest bank in the nation and the most successful example of the new style of aggressive growth management. Wriston was himself an outspoken and bold banker, contemptuous of government interference in banking and also an important convert to monetarism. The twelve council members included eight chief executives from banks that ranked in the largest hundred in the nation, among them Continental Illinois of Chicago, Republic Bank of Dallas, Pittsburgh National Bank and the Girard Bank of Philadelphia. Their perspective on banking issues naturally reflected their size. A reasonably alert banker on the advisory council might infer from the board’s questions what the governors were contemplating for the future.

The advisory council’s minutes did not corroborate the lurid accusations of conspiracy, but the bankers’ reports did offer a rough gauge of how close the Federal Reserve’s own perspective on the American economy was to the narrow self-interests of the major commercial banks. In the fall of 1979, the alignment proved to be quite close. When the Federal Advisory Council met on September 7, its members congratulated the governors on their recent increases in short-term interest rates. But the bankers urged them to do more of the same.

“The main concern is whether these rates are high enough to stem the bulge which has occurred in the monetary aggregates,” the bankers said. “In recent months, the excessive growth in the money supply suggests that credit creation is rising at a faster pace than desired. ... In this respect, the need to slow the rapid growth in monetary aggregates should take priority over concerns about further upward moves in domestic interest rates.” This was the same policy perspective the governors themselves would agree on later in the month.

The bankers also asked the Federal Reserve to consider changing its operating methods, the same proposal that Volcker was then discussing confidentially with the other governors. The minutes did not reflect who brought up this possibility in the private discussions, but the bankers addressed it in their summary report:

Some members of the council expressed concern over the operational techniques of the Federal Reserve in respect to whether it should focus on interest-rate targets or the monetary aggregates in determining an appropriate policy. This is a difficult question to answer, but it is suggested that a re-examination of operational techniques be made.

This recommendation was striking because it occurred three weeks before the governors would reach their own private agreement on shifting to the monetarist approach—and long before Jimmy Carter was told about the Federal Reserve’s intentions.24

On Saturday, September 29, the day after the governors resolved their differences over reordering the Fed’s regulation of money, the Federal Reserve chairman boarded a plane for Europe, bound for the annual conference of the International Monetary Fund, in Belgrade, Yugoslavia. At first, Volcker had wanted to skip the IMF meeting, because he was so busy with the details of the operating shift and so eager to move quickly to implement it. Other Fed officials persuaded him to go. The IMF conference drew the finance ministers and central bankers of the world, the representatives of 138 nations, rich and poor, and it would look odd if the new chairman of America’s central bank did not attend.





The airplane was the Secretary of the Treasury’s jet, and the other passengers included Volcker’s predecessor as Fed chairman, G. William Miller, who was now at Treasury, and Charles L. Schultze, the liberal economist who was chairman of President Carter’s Council of Economic Advisers. Crossing the Atlantic, Volcker took the occasion to inform these officials of the Carter Administration, for the first time, how he intended to change things at the Federal Reserve.

Both of them were immediately hostile to the idea. They agreed that the Federal Reserve must do more to tighten the supply of money and credit, but both argued against the change in operating methods that Volcker was preparing. Miller complained that if the Fed began targeting reserves directly, it would produce more volatility in interest rates, sharp fluctuations in credit costs that would disrupt the economy and might actually exacerbate inflation.

Schultze had more fundamental objections: the new operating system would lock in the Fed, put it on a course from which it could not turn back. And that course would lead, sooner or later, to recession.

No one in the conversation needed to point out that next year was 1980 and Jimmy Carter would be running for re-election.

Volcker listened to the arguments and told them: “I’ll think it over.” When they returned to Washington, he promised, the Administration would have a full opportunity to react to his plan in more detail before the Fed took action. Volcker believed, however, that changing the operating method was a technical issue of monetary policy, a question that ultimately only the Fed itself could decide.

Under the law, the Federal Reserve chairman had no formal obligation to tell the White House anything or to take its objections into account. As a practical matter of politics, however, Volcker needed to know how the Carter White House might react. If the President was going to attack him when interest rates shot up, joined by a chorus of angry representatives and senators, his initiative might become mired in partisan controversy.

They’re entitled to know what we are doing, if they play the game and don’t double-cross you by leaking it [Volcker said]. You’ve got a direct interest in finding out how they feel. You want to know if there is going to be opposition or not. It might just affect the credibility of the action and the sustainability of the action. You are concerned about the counterforces that might be set in motion that could undermine what you are going to do..

Volcker’s informal communication with the Carter Administration illustrated the ambiguous terms that linked the Federal Reserve with the rest of the federal government, the elected President and Congress. The relationship was nowhere expressed in concrete rules and obligations. Instead, its boundaries were vague and subjective, determined by political judgment. In every important instance, the Fed chairman had to evaluate the situation before acting, much the way any elected politician measured his potential opposition before committing himself to a major issue or a new campaign. The Federal Reserve could act independently, but how far should it go? At what point would it provoke such a powerful political reaction that, ultimately, it could be stripped of its cherished independence?

As Volcker explained:

The Federal Reserve as an institution has to operate within some broad parameters of what people can understand and support. You just can’t cut 180 degrees across everything that other people understand. They have to know your purpose and understand if some pain is involved, even if they don’t agree in every detail. If you are outside that vague consensus, you’re in trouble.

The Carter policy makers were unhappy with his plans, but at least they agreed that something more dramatic had to be done to break the inflationary momentum. En route to Belgrade, the plane stopped first in Hamburg, Germany, where Volcker’s sense of urgency received an influential endorsement. The American officials sat through a stern lecture from Helmut Schmidt, chancellor of West Germany, on the need for stronger monetary measures.

When the delegation arrived at the IMF conference, Volcker and the others heard the same message, in the strongest terms, in conversations with the central bankers and finance ministers of Western Europe. The dollar was still sliding in value on international exchange markets and the United States must act forcefully to reverse the decline. Arthur Burns, the former Fed chairman, contributed to the gloomy atmosphere in Belgrade with a lecture entitled “The Anguish of Central Banking.” It is illusory, Burns lamented, to expect central banks to extinguish inflation when popular political forces pull the other way.

Volcker left early. He had discussed his plans for a major policy shift in elliptical terms with several of his best friends among the other central bankers, but saw no point in staying longer. On Tuesday, with the conference still under way, Volcker departed for Washington, a development that touched off wild rumors and price gyrations in the financial markets of Europe and the United States.

Among Wall Street insiders, the sequence of events in Belgrade created an enduring myth about Volcker’s motivation—that the Fed chairman was so jarred by the complaints of European financiers that he rushed home to do something drastic. That version was mistaken in the particulars—Volcker had decided to act even before attending the IMF conference—but it was not wrong in the larger sense. The American government had been pounded for many months by the leading voices of international finance, both American bankers and European, demanding a halt to the dollar’s decline in international exchange. The Federal Reserve responded more sensitively to this constituency than did elected politicians.

The weakening dollar was, in one sense, actually beneficial for the real economy in the United States. It gave American exporters an enormous edge in trading competition with foreign producers, an artificial price advantage in international markets from agriculture to heavy manufacturing. That meant greater U.S. output and more jobs. Foreign governments naturally complained and accused the U.S. of debasing its currency deliberately in order to grab a larger share of global markets.

But the most influential institutions of international finance suffered proportionately—particularly the multinational bankers, both American and foreign, who dealt worldwide in dollar-denominated transactions. The depreciating dollar meant their dollar assets were steadily losing value. The largest U.S. banks, for instance, had lent tens of billions to the developing nations of Latin America, and these loans were all pegged in dollars. When the dollar declined in international exchange, the real value of the international loans automatically declined—reducing the debt burden for foreign borrowers just as domestic inflation eased it for home buyers in the United States. Multinational lenders lost for the same reason creditors at home were losing.

For obvious political purposes, Federal Reserve officials tried to downplay the importance of international finance in forcing their hand. A frontal attack against domestic price inflation might be widely welcomed by the American public, even if it required some pain. But raising interest rates sharply in order to save the assets of the money-center banks and other global financiers did not sound like a popular cause. The two, in any case, were expressions of the same monetary policy. Regardless of its motivation, the Fed could not confront domestic inflation without also affecting the international value of the dollar.

When Treasury Secretary Miller and CEA Chairman Schultze returned to Washington on Thursday, they stepped up their efforts to talk Volcker out of going forward with his scheme. They did not have much time—Volcker was planning a special meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on Saturday, October 6. Schultze began a series of hurried meetings, trying to persuade Volcker to relent and the White House that it should resist. Schultze took the issue to Stuart Eizenstat, the President’s chief adviser for domestic policy, and asked him to help convince the President to intervene.

Over the next two days, in meetings and phone calls, Schultze again urged Volcker to reconsider. Raise interest rates, if you must, he pleaded, but don’t change the operating system. “Volcker was going to move very quickly, because if it ever leaked, it would be very bad,” Schultze said. “Granting that something had to be done, my objection was that once you do this, you can’t back out. Once you tell the world this is the money target and we are going to follow it no matter what happens to interest rates, you have to stick with it and you have no flexibility.”

This was more than a technical argument between economists: Schultze foresaw bleak consequences for the election season ahead. “What I could see very clearly, without knowing the exact timing,” he said, “was that given the inflationary pressures we were under, if the Fed adopted a rigid monetary policy and promised its clients to stick to it, very likely we would be driven into a recession and we wouldn’t be able to back out of it.”

Schultze also recognized the political advantages that attracted the Fed governors to the scheme.

In the mind of the Fed, this whole move was, in the broadest sense, a political move, not an economic move. In theory, the Fed could have kept on raising the bejesus out of the interest rates, but that’s what it couldn’t do politically. The beautiful thing about this new policy was that as interest rates kept going up, the Fed could say, “Hey, ain’t nobody here but us chickens. We’re not raising interest rates, we’re only targeting the money supply.” This way they could raise the rates and nobody could blame them.

The fundamental relationship between the supply of money and the price of money, better known as interest rates, was obvious to economists—if supply shrinks, interest rates go up. It was not so obvious to many noneconomists, including the President of the United States. In fact, Volcker kidded the Administration economists on this point. Charles Schultze recalled: “Paul said to us, ‘It was really a meeting with Jimmy Carter that gave me the idea. Carter said to me, “Why can’t you control the quantity of credit without raising interest rates?” ’ Volcker told us that’s what gave him the idea to target money supply instead of interest rates.” Volcker’s remark was facetious, of course, an inside joke among professionals about a layman’s ignorance of the fundamentals.

While Volcker did not yield to Schultze’s objections, he was concerned enough about the potential for trouble that he sounded out another Administration official, one who would be more sympathetic to the Fed’s situation. Volcker consulted Anthony Solomon, the Treasury Under Secretary for Monetary Affairs, who six months later would assume Volcker’s old position, president of the New York Federal Reserve Bank. Solomon had worked closely with Volcker on international economic issues during the 1960s when he was at the State Department and Volcker was at Treasury; they thought alike on these questions. Now Solomon shared the Fed chairman’s sense of urgency and wanted to help him avoid a public conflict with the White House. Solomon suggested that Volcker and the Administration officials take their argument directly to the President and let him hear both sides.

When Volcker told Schultze and Miller that he was willing to see the President to explain the Federal Reserve’s intentions, they told him not to bother. Instead, the two of them, accompanied by Eizen-stat, went to Jimmy Carter themselves—and urged the President to express his personal opposition to the Federal Reserve chairman. “You didn’t play fair with Volcker,” Solomon complained to them later. “Volcker should have been at that meeting to explain his position.”

Jimmy Carter, like all his modern predecessors, did not have a strong grasp of the issues of monetary policy. Nothing in the experience of American political leaders prepared them to deal with the subject; the tradition of Fed independence encouraged the notion that money regulation was something left to the experts, a forbidden area where politicians were not supposed to intrude. Richard Nixon, who was as well trained for the Chief Executive’s job as any modern President, told an interviewer years later that one of his greatest regrets was that he never mastered an understanding of what went on at the Federal Reserve.25 Most of the politicians who served in the White House, as well as in Congress, could make a similar confession. As Tony Solomon observed:

No President really understands these things, but the disturbing thing about Carter was that he tried to use the economic jargon as though he did. He tried to make it seem that he understood the technical arguments when he clearly didn’t. A President like Lyndon Johnson never pretended to understand all these things—he was only interested in the bottom line. He would ask: What were the political effects? What would happen to interest rates? What did he have to do in order to deal with it? Carter would enter into technical discussions which he only partially understood.

In the event, Jimmy Carter declined to do anything. Resistance was not possible, Carter told his advisers, given his own weakened political status. The White House had no choice but to acquiesce. The President could not challenge the new economic policy determined independently by the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board. Besides, as Eizenstat said, “The President is basically a very honest guy who believes in the integrity of the political system. He had put that guy in there and, by God, he was going to stand by him.”

Schultze’s explanation was that

the Fed held all the cards. Unemployment was down and inflation was rising. The general structure of political power was such that all of the business and financial community was solidly behind the Fed. The dollar was shaky. The White House had to be very careful about taking on the Fed. Unless it literally wanted to take on a populist campaign that would drive the dollar down even further, we had to be very careful.

Two months earlier, Carter had chosen Paul Volcker almost by accident. Now the President was implicitly surrendering control to him. The Federal Reserve would steer the national government’s economic policy now. Over the coming years, the Fed’s true role in the American system would become more and more visible to ordinary citizens, as Volcker asserted its leverage over economic life. He would be personally reviled and praised, recognized in public-opinion polls as the second most powerful person in the land. In hindsight, it would be understood that the autumn of 1979 was a historic juncture in the political course of the nation. What was not understood was that this crucial transaction occurred with an enfeebled President’s acquiescence, but not with his approval.

The episode also required deep political judgments by officials of the Federal Reserve. Beyond the tactical arguments, Volcker was implicitly making his own political assessment of the nation: an assumption that the nation was ready for what he intended to do, a sustained assault on inflation, including the economic pain that would come with it. Certainly that is what the bankers and financial markets wanted.

If the general public would support the initiative, perhaps even wanted it to happen, then the potential impact on Jimmy Carter’s political future might be irrelevant. In the fall of 1979, Jimmy Carter already looked gravely wounded. His popular standing remained low; his own party was deeply divided about his prospects for a second term. It was plausible to assume that the President’s fate had perhaps already been settled by events, by his own errors and weakness and bad luck. In any case, if the Federal Reserve's actions added an election-year recession to the President’s troubles, such actions would not necessarily provoke political attacks aimed at the Fed. A recession might simply be one more reason not to re-elect Jimmy Carter.

The boardroom at the top of the marble stairs was a cavernous chamber; subtly bathed in gold. The walls were covered in a pale-gold damask, and a monumental chandelier hung far above the floor on strands of golden chains, decorated with a motif of golden eagles guarding huge gold coins. The seven governors and twelve Reserve Bank presidents, joined by a few staff professionals, sat around the massive table before the fireplace, dwarfed by the awesome proportions of their private place.

“We were summoned to Washington and none of us knew a damned thing,” said Larry Roos, president of the St. Louis Fed. “I nearly fell out of my chair when I observed that all of my colleagues, many of whom had been disdainful, were now all supporting a monetarist approach.”

The extraordinary Saturday meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee lasted all day, as Volcker and others went over and over the details of the watershed decision. The chairman himself played the reluctant advocate, raising doubts and questions and allowing other members to dispel them. “Paul was masterful,” Fred Schultz said. “I knew exactly what he was doing. The others ended up arguing with him, talking him into doing it. By the end of the day, he had them fully committed.”

At the White House, Charles Schultze had not quite given up. He phoned Volcker again and made one last plea not to do it. Raise interest rates, if you must, but don’t get locked into a rigid system that guarantees recession. The President’s adviser, however, did not attempt to bluster. The White House, he confided to Volcker, did not intend to attack the Fed chairman publicly if he proceeded.

The import of their decision was clear to the FOMC members. They were voting, in effect, to put the national economy into a contraction. That was the expected outcome, and Volcker himself confided his own pessimism to colleagues.

“Others would say to me, ‘Well, you know this will likely cause a recession,’” Governor Coldwell said. “I told them, ‘Yes, I know that. But that’s the penalty you have to pay for going out too far on the inflation side.’ There wasn’t any question that the board knew that recession would follow.”

When the press was summoned in late afternoon, that is not what the Federal Reserve told the American public. The announcement was couched in technical language that financial traders might understand, but the words had no meaning for average citizens or even most politicians. There was nothing said about what the Fed intended for the U.S. economy. In fact, when a reporter asked Volcker if the likely result would be slower growth and higher unemployment, Volcker evaded the point and concealed his real expectations.

“Well, you get varying opinions about that,” the Federal Reserve chairman replied. “I don’t think it will have important effects in that connection. I would be optimistic about the results of these actions. ... I think the best indications that I have now, in an uncertain world, is that this can be accomplished reasonably smoothly.”





