4 BEHAVIOR MODIFICATION


Financial markets are like “a collection of overlapping crowds,” Albert M. Wojnilower once observed. As chief economist at First Boston, one of the nation’s leading investment banks, Wojnilower was one of those rare economists who could see beyond the hard numbers of finance to the human ambiguities that influenced them. Financial traders, he pointed out, gathered literally in “crowds” on the trading-room floors of the stock market and in the commodity exchanges. They milled and gossiped, watched what others watched, calculated where the “crowd” was headed. In credit markets, the “crowds” were assembled electronically—all watching their video screens, reading the same bid/ask quotations, gossiping by telephone.

Traders [wrote Wojnilower] must and do therefore respond literally instantly to all news to which they think other traders might respond. Whether the news is considered economically significant or even true is immaterial. Moreover, it is well known that crowds generate, transmit, and respond to messages (rumors included) very differently from individuals.1

When the various “crowds” of Wall Street gathered on Monday morning, October 8, they were jostled by their own ignorance, leaderless and a bit frightened. The Federal Reserve System, including the New York Federal Reserve Bank, was closed for the government holiday, Columbus Day, but the financial markets attempted to digest he meaning of the Federal Reserve Board’s dramatic Saturday announcement. Nothing tangible had changed, yet everything was different. The crowds’ normal expectations were asunder. The Fed, they knew, had suddenly delivered them into a new world, but none of them pretended to understand it.

The Dow Jones index of industrial stocks, which had momentarily reached the 900 level on Friday, lost nearly 14 points. On Tuesday, the Dow index would fall another 27 points. Bond prices also fell sharply, as much as 2% points on long-term government bonds, the equivalent of $23 per $1,000. Gold prices dropped $17 an ounce, then reversed on Tuesday and rose $49 an ounce in two days. In the money market, the Federal Funds rate, trading around 11.5 percent on Friday, jumped to nearly 14 percent on Monday and other short-term interest rates followed, beginning a zigzag pattern of daily swings unlike anything the traders had ever seen before.

In the next few weeks, the Fed Funds rate, which money traders watched as their key barometer, which the Federal Reserve could control most reliably if it wished, moved like a Yo-Yo—perversely unpredictable. It went as high as 18 percent one day, then back to 14 percent the next, then up again to 16 percent, then plunging briefly as low as 11 percent, then back up again. When the Fed Funds rate jumped above the ceiling that the Federal Open Market Committee had set for it, the committee held a special meeting by telephone conference and agreed to tolerate such divergences temporarily. In the gallows humor of Wall Street, the Federal Reserve’s policy shift swiftly became known as Paul Volcker’s “Saturday Night Special.”2

One of America’s premier manufacturers, IBM, had the bad fortune to enter the credit markets, seeking new capital, just as the storm broke. The week before, IBM had announced it was floating $1 billion in corporate notes and bonds, the largest debt offering ever made by an American corporation. IBM was a blue-chip company, practically a risk-free investment, and the notes sold briskly at first. By midweek, however, the offering fell apart. Brokers could find no more buyers for the IBM paper, which promised a return of nearly 9.5 percent, because the interest rate on long-term government bonds had already climbed higher, piercing double digits for the first time. Why lend capital to IBM when the U.S. Treasury, the most risk-free debtor of all, was paying an even better return? About half of the IBM issue went unsold, and the syndicate of major brokerages that had underwritten the package had to swallow losses of $45 to $50 million.

The new uncertainty cost many others. One trader at a major investment firm told The Wall Street Journal: “My strategy is to look at the numbers, then run out in the hall so I won’t be here to make any mistakes.”

On Tuesday morning, as usual, Peter D. Sternlight walked to work. It took about an hour from his home near Brooklyn’s Prospect Park, across the Brooklyn Bridge and through the twisted streets of lower Manhattan to his office at the New York Federal Reserve Bank in the heart of Wall Street. Sternlight was manager of the Open Market Desk, the chief technician of monetary policy. He was a slight man with dark hair and owlish glasses who would be lost in the sidewalk sea of clerks and brokers, though his daily decisions to buy or sell securities made him the most active and important trader on Wall Street, perhaps in the world.

The New York Fed, at Liberty and Nassau, was fondly described in official pamphlets as inspired by the elegant lines of a Florentine palazzo in the age of the Medici, an architectural point that was recognizable only if one looked up at the facade of graceful arches and balustrades on the top floors. At street level, the building looked merely forbidding, even grim. The narrow windows were covered by heavy iron bars, and the gray stones were stained by three generations of New York soot. It looked like a bank in the old-fashioned tradition of austerity, but it could have been mistaken for a prison.

Among other things, the New York Fed was the Fort Knox of international finance. In the basement, five stories below street level and behind a ninety-ton revolving door, the gold vault held about 40 percent of all the gold in the world, thirteen thousand tons valued at $140 billion. Some of it was American-owned, but most of it was owned by the central banks of other nations, carefully stored in separate cages. In international-exchange transactions, the bars of gold were simply moved from one cage to another. Even governments that were quite hostile to the United States found it prudent to keep their gold reserves in America, safeguarded from revolution or other upheavals that might occur at home.

Most of the New York Fed, like the eleven other Reserve Banks, was actually a “factory,” as Fed officials themselves referred to it, a processing plant that shipped fresh currency to banks and destroyed the old, a clearinghouse that managed the traffic among banks in canceled checks and kept the accounts that had to balance all the millions of payments flowing back and forth each day. The “factory” functions occupied most of the Fed employees, essential but routine.

On the eighth floor, Peter Sternlight’s trading room, staffed with fifteen or so young people, housed the real action—the Open Market Desk. His traders watched video screens and worked telephone consoles connected to the thirty-six dealers who were authorized to trade government securities with the Fed, the major bond brokerages and a dozen of the largest banks. The Fed traders faced eleven large panels hung around three walls which listed every single issue of outstanding U.S. bills, notes and bonds. Thirty years earlier, the trading-room walls held only three panels, a change that nicely conveyed how enormously the government’s debt had grown in the intervening decades.

On a typical morning, Sternlight would decide, after consulting with Washington, whether to buy or sell a block of securities or do nothing. The thirty-six private dealers would be asked to make bids, without being told what the action was to be. At about eleven-thirty, the Fed traders would call them back and announce the transaction, who bought or sold how much. In other trading rooms at brokerages and banks all over the city, clerks would cry out the news—“The Fed’s in!”—and scores of Fed watchers would immediately set to calculating what the effects would be on the money-market interest rates.

On many days, Sternlight would be adjusting the level of bank reserves for incidental reasons, offsetting random shifts in the money supply for purely technical reasons. A seasonal surge of money, for instance, always accompanied the Christmas holidays, when people drew down their savings accounts to have extra cash, or around April 15, when federal income taxes were paid and refund checks were mailed out. Occasionally, money became too plentiful because of a sudden surge in the “float” between banks. If a bad storm closed airports in the Midwest, daily shipments of canceled checks by the Federal Reserve would be stalled. For a time, until the checks were cleared, banks on both ends would be counting the same money on their books, artificially swelling the total supply of money by billions of dollars.

Sternlight compensated for all these factors and many others, including huge transactions in behalf of foreign governments, which the New York Fed also handled. It took an experienced Fed watcher to judge whether the Fed was “in the market” for technical reasons or for some larger purpose, such as moving the interest rates up or down. Federal Reserve officials believed these “defensive” adjustments were necessary for market stability and for their own control; otherwise, traders would be reacting to random ebbs and surges that had nothing to do with the path of credit expansion.

Critics like Milton Friedman and other monetarists claimed that the New York Fed’s constant tinkering was not only unnecessary but amounted to “churning” the public’s account, creating heavy transactions as an implicit fringe benefit for the private dealers. In a typical year, Sternlight would execute as much as $700 billion in short-term transactions—yet at year’s end the net change in the Fed’s holdings might amount to less than $10 billion. Whether the Fed was buying or selling, the thirty-six dealers could count on getting a price marginally better than what was available in the private market. The edge was slight, not greater than 4 or 5 basis points. That would be equivalent to only $80 or $100 on a $1 million transaction in three-month T-bills, hardly a bonanza, but even a slender margin added up when it was multiplied through $700 billion in transactions.3

When Peter Sternlight surveyed the market turmoil and rising rates, he first thought he would do a modest repurchase agreement, $1 or $2 billion, to give some reassurance to the frightened traders. Repo’s, as they were called, were a standard Fed technique, selling or buying securities with an agreement to reverse the transaction three or four days later—in other words, a temporary withdrawal or injection of reserves that could be erased or continued depending on conditions later. The desk didn’t want to put in too much assurance, he figured, because the Fed wanted to show the markets it was serious. After consulting with Stephen Axilrod, the staff director in Washington, he decided to do nothing—let the market find its own way.

In the trading room, William C. Melton, a Fed economist working as one of the open-market traders, heard quick evidence of the money market’s confusion. Melton has recalled:

I got a phone call from a friend at a securities dealer firm who opened the conversation by saying, “Welcome to the free-fall market! There are no bids on the screens!” What he meant was that none of the government securities dealers was sufficiently certain of what was happening to be able to say what a proper interest rate was for a Treasury bill or a government bond and, in those circumstances, they did not want to own any.

That afternoon, Sternlight held a special briefing for the dealers, to explain the new system. The Fed would not be as rigid and mechanical in letting interest rates float freely as its monetarist critics would like, Sternlight explained. It would still assert control over the rates to compensate for short-term variables. The new system, he emphasized, was “still very much experimental.” These words did not reassure the anxious traders. Melton heard one of them mutter: “Here’s one lab rat who has just dropped a million bucks.”4

Sternlight, one of those anonymous technocrats who exercised enormous power, experienced a brief moment of celebrity that day. One of the New York television stations interviewed him and he appeared on the evening news with a twenty-second explanation of what was happening in the financial markets. “It has haunted me ever since,” he said. “My barber and my postman in Brooklyn saw me on TV and now, every time I see them, they ask me when interest rates are coming down.”

The Federal Reserve Board chairman was reassuring a different group that day, the commercial bankers gathered in New Orleans for the annual convention of their major trade group, the American Bankers Association. “Those measures were not designed to make your life as bankers easier,” Volcker conceded. But, he promised, money and credit would be kept under firm control as long as the inflationary pressures were building. In the atmosphere of speculation and unsettled markets, Volcker delivered a special admonition for the bankers: “The Board of Governors has particularly stressed its own concern that, in a time of limited resources, banks should take care to avoid financing essentially speculative activity in commodity, gold and foreign-exchange markets.”

The banks, he added, were better equipped than federal regulators to decide which loans would be genuinely productive and which would simply finance speculative buying, but the chairman underscored his warning. “This is hardly the time to search out exotic new lending areas or to finance speculative or purely financial activities that have little to do with the performance of the American economy,” Volcker said.

Volcker was not dismayed by the volatile indecision of the financial markets. “I think the point may be,” he told a TV interviewer, “that we captured their attention and I think that’s constructive.” The turmoil, he hoped, would eventually produce a new optimism in Wall Street. “A lot of people were skeptical about whether we could deal with inflation,” the chairman said. “I hope they’re less skeptical now than they were before.”5

In St. Louis, Larry Roos called a press conference at the St. Louis Fed to celebrate the monetarist victory. “We are elated,” Roos said. “The St. Louis view has prevailed.” Some of the leading monetarist economists were not so sure. The Federal Reserve had announced strong new policy initiatives in past years that turned out, in practice, to be more of the same. They applauded Volcker’s decision but remained skeptical about whether the Fed would truly stick to its money-growth targets. “I didn’t send a congratulatory telegram,” said Allan Meltzer, a monetarist who was cochairman of the Shadow Open Market Committee. “I’m going to hold my breath and hope they don’t mess it up.”

The turmoil and losses in financial markets continued. The stock market rose to record volumes of daily trading and, within a month, the Dow Jones index lost 100 points. The bond-market prices swung as much in a single day as they had in a month, and by November, the paper value of corporate and government bonds had fallen by as much as $200 million. The dollar’s value increased moderately, and gold, after its initial decline, surged a bit. Short-term interest rates continued to bounce around a lot, but they established a new level much higher than before. Money-market funds, where depositors could earn the rising market rates rather than the fixed-interest rates of savings deposits, began a surge of growth—$14.2 billion in October alone—that would continue for more than a year as more and more citizens discovered them. The prime rate charged by commercial banks for standard business loans rose from 13.5 to 15.5 percent.6

Money was tighter. Notwithstanding the markets’ confusion and gyrations, the change was clear in the Federal Reserve’s monitoring of the monetary aggregates, M-l and the others. Money growth was slowing down steadily, a welcome change from the runaway expansion that had alarmed the Fed in August and September.

If the money supply was tightening, then credit was tightening too —a shrinking supply of new loans for business and consumers. Inevitably, tighter credit meant that, across America, people who were not financial investors or market traders, who did not read The Wall Street Journal or follow the Federal Funds rate, would also be compelled to alter their lives. Millions of citizens would immediately feel the impact in the most intimate terms, including many people who did not know there was a Federal Reserve Board in Washington or understand its purposes.

William Kline, a real-estate agent and home builder in Portsmouth, Virginia, read the newspapers and acted promptly. Kline sold off his last house, laid off two secretaries, dismissed his construction superintendent and shut off the office phone. For twenty years, his small construction company had built about twenty-five homes a year while he sold real estate on the side. Now, Kline decided, he would be only a realtor.

“I read that interest rates were going to be volatile,” he said, “and I chose right away to say: no more building. The minute interest rates rise, most people will not buy a home.”

As an independent contractor, Kline could be swiftly caught in the middle. When a new house was finished but still unsold, the contractor had to pay regular interest installments on the bank loan that financed the construction—loans that were now costing 16 percent or more. “The big problem is, if you don’t sell the house right away, your interest payments are about $100 a week,” Kline said. “And that’s what we aren’t willing to do.”

His decision was wise. Other small builders he knew tried to stay active and went broke. “The little guy, who should have been helped by the American enterprise system, got knocked off his feet,” Kline complained.

James Woulfe sold Fords and Chrysler-Plymouths at dealerships in Dublin, California, when interest rates took off. He knew he had two big problems: the higher credit costs would drive away customers and would also make it more expensive for him to finance his inventory of automobiles. Woulfe immediately began cutting back on his inventory, ordering fewer of the new models from Detroit than he had intended.

Still, his sales would eventually shrink by 50 percent and he had to dismiss twenty of his sixty employees. His sales tactics shifted from family buyers to business clients who could afford the higher interest rates or even pay cash. “That’s what we had to do,” Woulfe explained, “just to get our business to 50 percent.”

Richard LeCates, president of United Building and Development in Salisbury, Maryland, knew immediately that interest rates would shoot up, but he did not grasp how far. “I’m in the money business,” LeCates said. “Any builder who doesn’t think he’s a banker is wrong.” When short-term rates topped 15 percent at the end of October, LeCates thought the worst was over. “I figured we could live with it,” he said. “We’d raise prices a little, take a little less profit. I figured wrong.”

In the last eighteen years, LeCates’s construction company had built and sold thirty-five hundred homes. In the next two years, it would sell only one—a house that remained on the market, unsold, for a year and a half.

In Springfield, Pennsylvania, Marvin Berger laid off half of his twenty-five employees at Rayco Auto Services, an auto-parts store and repair garage. Inflation was eating away at his profits, but he couldn’t keep raising prices without driving away customers. Berger described the anxiety felt by thousands of small-business managers: “We open up our stores every morning, turn on our adding machines, unlock our cash drawers, and hope like hell that some invisible hand will bring enough heads through the door so that we, with our products and sales ability, can ring up a sale.”

Jimmy Jackson, a home builder in Chesapeake, Virginia, felt the same anxiety. Four of his fellow contractors in the Tidewater area of Virginia were now headed for bankruptcy. “I didn’t see the crunch coming,” he said. “We had come through a couple of good years. When you have good years, you tend to get more overhead—a receptionist, a vehicle, things you need to expand. You have to do that to expand, but you don’t have any control over the economy.”

Even with cutbacks, the soaring interest rates threatened his survival. “I was scared I wasn’t going to make the payments on things I already had out,” Jackson said. “You start a business, work at it, and then something you have no control over comes along and does you in.”

In the Middle West, many farmers also did not get the message. Later, many of them would pay dearly for their ignorance. Farmers could hardly be faulted for not instantly grasping the significance of the Federal Reserve’s action. Many of the farm economists who advised them did not understand it either.

“I don’t think anyone in the agricultural sector was aware of the impact of that move,” said Vivan Jennings, associate dean of the Iowa Cooperative Extension Service, which counseled farmers on management decisions. “It was not really something that seemed important at the time. Even our best economists, they were talking about business as usual.”

Small-town bankers who served the agricultural sector, likewise, did not perceive any crucial changes in Volcker’s October 6 announcement. “When we heard that, we said, ‘He can’t do that,’” Neal Conover, president of the Citizens Savings Bank of Afton, Iowa, scoffed. “We ought to pay attention to what those people do from now on. We learned our lesson.”

Many farmers would learn the hard way, borrowing at the higher interest rates in order to buy land and expand production just as the national economy was being pushed in the opposite direction. “You can’t manage your way around this with ultimate effectiveness,” Conover conceded. “It’s luck. Dumb luck. People decided on October fifth to buy the hundred and fifty acres that opened up next to them. Now, all of a sudden, through bright, sound business judgment, he may be gone.”

As interest rates rose in financial markets, two effects rippled through the real economy. First, many potential customers for homes or cars or other goods were discouraged from buying at the higher prices. Second, customers who still wanted to buy despite the higher interest rates found it harder to obtain loans. The tighter credit conditions induced by the Fed compelled the lending institutions, from commercial banks to credit unions, to impose their own versions of rationing—choosing carefully among the many potential borrowers who were competing for the limited supply of loan money, accepting some and turning away others.

Chemical Bank in New York raised its minimum-income requirement for consumer loans from $8,000 to $10,000. The Portland Teachers Credit Union in Portland, Oregon, imposed restrictions on “luxury items”—no more loans for recreational vehicles, mobile homes, furniture, boats, vacations, stock purchases. In Illinois, some savings and loan associations stopped taking applications for new mortgage loans entirely. Others required larger down payments or lowered the maximum loans available.

On Long Island, the Suffolk County Federal Savings & Loan Association decided to lend only to people who already had accounts and to their immediate relatives or to families that were newcomers to Long Island—if they made a savings deposit. Even with those limitations, customers streamed in. “It was quite difficult,” said a vice president at Suffolk County Federal. “People heard we were giving loans at all and everyone came knocking on the door.”

The smaller credit organizations were forced to shut down their lending because they themselves were losing access to money. As market interest rates escalated, depositors of quite modest means withdrew their savings from their local thrifts or banks or company credit unions and shopped around for some place where the money could earn a higher return. Billions of dollars flowed into the money-market funds operated by the larger brokerages in New York.

The State Employees Credit Union of Virginia lost about $750,000 in withdrawals by its members in a few months. “They don’t tell us exactly where they’re putting the money,” said Dorothy J. Hall, the general manager and treasurer, “but we know many of them are investing it for higher yields elsewhere.” In the nation’s capital, the Department of Labor Federal Credit Union was in “near panic,” according to its manager, Lina Gray. Long lines of Labor Department employees formed up each day to withdraw their savings, but no one made deposits. “It’s like having a sickness,” Gray said. “It’s so awful you can’t remember what caused it.” Deposits fell from $13 million to $7 million; the credit union stopped making loans for a year.

The nation’s savings and loans, which traditionally financed home buying, were in a particularly ominous box. Their portfolios were largely locked into long-term home mortgages—loans they had made at fixed interest rates of perhaps no more than 8 or 9 percent. As inflation and interest rates rose, the S & L’s found that their spread disappeared. Meanwhile, federal regulation limited how much interest they could pay on deposits and so S & L’s lost depositors too.

The stress would devastate the savings and loan industry, the bedrock lender of America’s postwar housing boom. For years to come, a large portion of the forty-five hundred S & L’s would remain “under water”—losing money each year as they struggled to stay in business. By 1983, a thousand of them would be gone.

As scarce money became more valuable, it found new homes where it would earn higher returns. Merrill Lynch’s Ready Assets Trust, started in 1975, offered market rates for anyone with $5,000 to buy a share. The pool of money was then re-lent in the money market to major borrowers—banks selling CDs, corporations selling commercial paper, the federal government selling T-bills. As the era of permanent high interest rates took hold, more and more savers flocked to the pond. Ready Assets grew in one year from 1.6 million shares to 8.1 million—$8 billion to $40 billion. Other firms rushed to offer their own money-market funds, and their number would roughly double in the next three years. In 1979, the money funds held $45 billion. By 1982, they held $207 billion. The net effect was to shift a huge volume of credit away from the smaller customers—consumers and small businesses—and toward larger ones who could pay the price.

By mid-November, the cumulative effects of all these shifts in the nation’s lending and borrowing were confirmed in the “red book,” the report on regional economic conditions that the twelve Federal Reserve Banks prepared for the FOMC meeting in Washington. The tightening was having the expected impact, according to the Reserve Bank presidents. Their summary report noted:

Mortgage and automobile lending are generally weak, but business lending continues to expand moderately, at least in some regions. . . . Real personal consumption expenditures are being depressed by the dearth of automobile sales, but continue to show resilience in other sectors.

. . . Most districts report marked slowing in residential construction and in sales of existing houses. . . . Manufacturing activity is particularly spotty. The automobile sector is exhibiting pervasive weakness, but there exist definite areas of strength. . . .

As the “red book” noted, however, the impact of tighter credit did not fall evenly on all citizens and enterprises. Some were forced to go without, while others did not feel any shortage at all.

Despite the prevailing level of interest rates, more stringent non-price lending terms and tighter credit standards, business loan demand continues to expand in most areas [the presidents observed]. Funds apparently remain available to businesses who are taking advantage of that availability. . . . Mortgage lending, on the other hand, seems to be severely and broadly depressed. . . . Some districts report non-price rationing of funds, while others find some lenders have withdrawn completely from mortgage lending activity.

None of these developments would have surprised any of the Federal Reserve governors. This was, after all, how they expected monetary policy to exert its will over the real economy.7

If the exercise of power were measured in terms of how swiftly and intimately it altered the behavior of others, then the Federal Reserve was arguably the most powerful instrument of government, certainly in the realm of economic behavior. Congress could raise taxes or authorize new spending, but that process took many months of legislative debate and its actual effects would usually not be felt by citizens until many months later. The President established the broad directions for tax-and-spending policies and, in extreme circumstances, might activate emergency controls over the economy. Neither Congress nor the White House, however, could affect private lives with the immediacy and universal reach of the Federal Reserve’s power, its ability to send instant signals rippling through every family’s financial decisions, to change the incentives in virtually every business transaction. The paradox for democracy was obvious: the Washington institution that was most intimately influential in the lives of ordinary citizens was the one they least understood, the one most securely shielded from popular control.

To understand how the Fed’s power worked, it was necessary again to step behind the abstractions of economics and describe the money system in more supple language. An economist, asked to explain monetary policy, would describe the mechanics of controlling the money supply, regulating bank reserves and adjusting interest rates, none of which conveyed very much to citizens who did not understand banking or macroeconomics. But an astute psychologist might look at how the monetary system worked and recognize its essential nature. A psychologist would describe what was going on in these terms: the Federal Reserve was operating a vast national program in behavior modification.

The model defined by behavioral psychology had a simple premise: a series of predictable rewards and punishments could be used as incentives to induce a subject to alter its behavior. A laboratory rat that went the wrong way in a maze would receive an electric shock. If the rat discovered the correct path, the route the psychologist wanted it to take, it would be rewarded with a food pellet. In time, the rat learned how to get to the food without getting shocked. The same principle was applied to human behavior. A truant child received promised rewards, candy or extra allowance, if he went to school. Rewards were replaced with penalties when he cut classes. Thus, behavior modification commanded not by rigid edict but by external pressures. A child (or a rat) was free to ignore the signals and continue the miscreant behavior—and pay a price for the wrong choice.

The Federal Reserve’s monetary policy was meant to influence the real economy in approximately the same manner—rewarding or punishing borrowers in order to change their behavior. When the Fed pushed up interest rates, this was a negative incentive, intended to dissuade both consumers and businesses from taking on new loans. If they did not borrow, then they would not buy things. Cumulatively their decisions not to borrow money and spend it would slow down the entire economy. The shrinking pool of willing buyers changed the incentives for producers too, inducing them to cut prices or to manufacture fewer of their products or both. They closed shop and laid off workers, just as frightened home builders like William Kline did after October 6. Smaller payrolls meant fewer citizens with money to spend, and the demand for goods and services contracted further.

As unemployment rose and personal incomes declined, along with business profits, the impact on inflation would be salutory: producers could not keep raising prices when their goods were already in excess supply; workers could not easily demand new wage increases when factories were closing and the pool of surplus labor was growing. Everyone’s bargaining position was reversed or at least weakened. If the process continued, feeding on itself as incomes declined, the national economy would soon be in an actual recession. The gross total of all output would shrink. And the Federal Reserve would eventually achieve its original objective: the upward pressures on prices would dissipate, inflation would slow down.

All of this was obvious to economists, who described the process as “dampening demand” or influencing the economy “through the demand channel.” The Federal Reserve found it awkward to speak in these terms since the Fed’s proclaimed function was to control the economy’s supply of money, not to manipulate the economic desires of all the nation’s families and businesses. Many citizens would likely be confused, perhaps even upset, to learn that the Fed controlled the money supply essentially by dampening or stimulating the economy’s aggregate demand for goods and services. Controlling the money supply seemed obscure and technical; manipulating prices was central to everyone’s daily life.

Still, the Federal Reserve’s official bulletins made no attempt to conceal the reality. “When the economy begins to expand too rapidly,” the Fed’s annual report explained, “the associated increase in the quantity of money demanded for transactions comes into conflict with the monetary target, and this results in a rise in market rates of interest; the rise in interest rates, in turn, damps the aggregate demand for goods and services.” In translation, the sentence might read: When all the potential buyers in the economy want more money and credit than the Fed thinks is healthy, the Fed refuses to supply the demand and that drives up interest rates. The higher interest rates, in turn, depress the public’s appetite for spending, and the demand for new loans subsides. The growth of money slows down—returning to the moderate level that the Federal Reserve wanted.8

That was the operating theory, at least. On its face, the Fed’s approach seemed universal and discreet. It did not try to control anyone’s private decisions directly, but it could modify the public’s economic behavior through interest-rate incentives. As government policy, the approach appeared to be general and disinterested, imposing the same discipline on all economic players equally, favoring none. That was the broad theory, but it didn’t work that way in the real world.

The Fed’s disciplinary system, in practice, punished the weakest, smallest players first and most severely, while the largest and more powerful enterprises could evade the ill consequences. Many families, businesses and financial institutions were compelled to alter their behavior swiftly—but others were privileged to continue business as usual. The rats in this laboratory maze, to use a tasteless metaphor, were not all equal.

The real cost of higher interest rates fell unevenly on citizens, banks and businesses, depending inversely on their level of incomes and profits. The wealthiest and most successful suffered least; struggling businesses and families of limited income paid the highest price. That was the most elementary point of political inequity, and it stemmed not simply from Federal Reserve policy but from how high interest rates interacted with the U.S. tax code. Every taxpayer, large or small, was entitled to deduct interest payments from his taxable income, but these deductions naturally became more valuable if one was in a higher-income bracket and was taxed at a higher rate. A corporation saved, for instance, 46 percent of its interest costs on its tax bill. A wealthy individual, paying the maximum tax rate, would recover 50 percent of his interest payments in tax savings or as much as 70 percent if all of his income was from stocks and bonds and other investments. This effectively cut the real cost of higher interest rates in half for them—while others paid the full freight. This differential was always present, but it became magnified as interest rates rose.

The trouble is, it’s very uneven in its impact on people [Governor Henry Wallich conceded]. Even at these rates, it’s very uneven when you think of real interest rates after taxes. If you are in the 50 percent tax bracket, you deduct half of the 13 or 16 percent charged for a loan and that means the real interest rate is still less than the inflation rate. A company that is making no money pays the full 13 percent. A profitable company that must pay taxes pays less. It’s the same with people who have no other income or are in a lower tax bracket. People with high incomes are affected much less than others.

A second element of discrimination penalized the same players— smaller businesses and average consumers. The use of higher interest rates to slow the economy naturally worked most swiftly on the sectors most dependent on credit to continue doing business—housing, automobiles and other durable goods like appliances or washing machines that Americans typically bought on credit. Most consumers, in fact, did not bother to calculate the interest-rate effects when they were thinking of buying a home or a car. They simply looked at the monthly payments they would have to make on the new mortgage or auto loan and compared that obligation with their incomes. When the monthly payments went up, some buyers would be priced out of the market. Small businesses like retailers, auto dealers and home builders were squeezed on both ends: their customers had to borrow to buy and they themselves had to borrow to maintain an inventory of appliances, cars, houses.

As Wallich explained:

Housing is very sensitive to high interest rates, because housing is a very postponable expenditure. I may be able to pay 13 percent on a mortgage, but I don’t have to buy that house now. The same effect is felt to some extent on automobiles. Those who can postpone do, and those who are financially very strong say, “I’ll go ahead and buy anyway.”

The effective consequence was a discreet system of rationing— rationing by price. When the Fed tightened, the limited supply of new credit was allocated by market forces not on the basis of who might need it most but according to the financial girth of the prospective borrowers. In combination with the tax code, high interest rates gave the advantage to the largest customers.

The idea that the government rationed any commodity was naturally repugnant to the free-market ethos of American politics. A system that rationed money in a way that favored the largest enterprises and wealthiest individuals would seem to be especially offensive. Except very few understood that this was how monetary policy worked and the government—both elected politicians and the Federal Reserve— had little incentive to make things clearer for people.

The Fed or Congress could, of course, have devised a more straightforward and equitable method for allocating credit in times of scarcity —one that did not depend on pushing the price so high that some people were forced out of the market. Any number of alternatives were feasible—banking regulations that required banks to apportion their new lending more evenly, tax-code changes that removed the advantage for the wealthier, more profitable borrowers. But, in order to adopt such a direct approach, the government would first have to acknowledge that it already practiced an implicit form of rationing. No one wished to admit that the free market was already, in fact, contaminated by government manipulation.

An alternative system—one that allocated credit according to need or other priorities rather than by price—would necessarily have to restrict the flow of credit available to the largest and most influential players in the economy—both financial institutions and corporations —in order to insure that home buyers, small businesses and others got their fair share. This was another good reason why most politicians preferred not to tamper with the status quo. To correct the inequities, they would have to directly attack the prerogatives of the strongest interests. .

Aside from the unfairness, the effectiveness of the existing system was also flawed: when the Federal Reserve attempted to restrain, its primary leverage was directed at the wrong end of the spectrum of borrowers—not at those most responsible for generating new credit. The pressure of higher interest rates was felt first and most potently by the weakest buyers and producers, but it was the strongest and largest enterprises that were the primary source of expanding credit. In order to budge them, the Federal Reserve had to keep raising the threshold of pain for others—squeezing the mice harder and harder, in effect, in the hope that eventually the elephants would respond. The strong, meanwhile, and their bankers managed to continue business as usual.

After October 6, the squeeze was on. Credit unions and savings and loan associations were losing deposits and cutting off loan applications. Banks were rationing consumer loans by raising the eligibility requirements. New mortgages were harder to get. But some financial institutions and their best customers—the largest money-center banks and the major multinational corporations—did not feel squeezed.

The Girard Bank of Philadelphia saw the Fed’s tightening of money and credit as an opportunity to win customers away from its competitors. “We’ll welcome quality business, reasonably priced,” said Robert Williams, vice chairman of Girard Company, the bank holding company that operated the nation’s seventieth-largest bank. “We’re in the business to get market share.”

The Bank of America in San Francisco, the nation’s largest commercial bank, also did not feel crimped by Paul Volcker’s dramatic policy change. Lloyd Sugaski, the bank’s executive vice president for loans, sounded positively bullish. “We’ve been taking on new business —soliciting good, credit-worthy customers—because that’s the only way we can grow. I don’t see any need to change that.”9

Their optimism was well founded. The largest banks in America were not compelled to slow down because the Federal Reserve was slowing the growth of money and credit and pushing interest rates to historic levels. On the contrary, it was an opportunity for them to increase market shares. Some loan customers were shut out, particularly consumers and smaller businesses. But the major banks’ most important customers, the great corporations that operated worldwide, wanted more credit in this time of scarcity. And they were promised all they wanted.

After October 6, bank lending slowed down sharply at first, as businesses and consumers were taken aback by the higher costs of borrowing. Then, two months later, the credit expansion began accelerating again—almost as though the Fed had done nothing to limit the supply. Three months after the “Saturday Night Special,” the commercial banks were expanding their loan portfolios at an annual rate of 14 percent—a robust pace in any season.

The major banks’ self-confident management was expressed even more clearly in their willingness to grant new lines of credit to their corporate clients who wanted assurances that, as money was tightening, they would not face scarcity. These formal loan commitments, which banks made for a fee, amounted to an “invisible money supply,” according to Albert Wojnilower of First Boston. The credit lines were legally-binding agreements by the banks to provide the promised funds whenever the customer wanted them. The banks were confident that, one way or another, they could find the money to lend, regardless of how high interest rates went. All through 1979, the banks’ loan commitments had been expanding at an alarming pace—an annual rate of 20 percent. After the Fed’s edict of October 6, the credit guarantees were actually expanded even faster—by 24 percent. In the first three months of 1980, the banks would add to their credit commitments at the extraordinary rate of 41 percent.

“A veritable credit eruption,” Wojnilower termed it. “The increase in these loan commitments relieved companies of any serious concern about a scarcity of spendable funds,” he explained. “The October 1979 spurt in interest rates and change in the Federal Reserve’s mode of operation to reserve targets exerted no perceptible retarding influence.”10

Federal Reserve officials were distressed by this contradictory development, but not entirely surprised. The same phenomenon had occurred, less dramatically, in previous episodes of monetary tightening over the preceding fifteen years—the limited supply of money and credit flowed to the top, as the larger banks scrambled to protect themselves and their customers from scarcity. This required the banks, first, to ration funds for the less-preferred borrowers, smaller enterprises or riskier ones, a process that bankers described as “improving the quality” of their loan portfolios. Second, the banks had to find more money somewhere. If the Federal Reserve wasn’t increasing the overall pool, they would have to get it on their own.

The effect was to compound the inequities of size that were already present because of higher interest rates. The small players suffered first from the “demand side” effects of monetary policy—priced out by higher interest rates. But they also suffered, perhaps as severely, on the “supply side”—the banks’ rationing of loans. Consumers and smaller businesses that were willing and able to pay the higher interest rates found they still could not obtain loans.

When Andrew F. Brimmer was a Federal Reserve governor in the 1970s, he was bothered enough to propose an alternative system— reserve requirements on bank loan portfolios that would force banks to allocate new lending more equitably among potential customers. The present system was not only unfair, Brimmer complained, but it also undermined the Fed’s own effectiveness.

One of the inescapable facts relating to the lending behavior of commercial banks—particularly the large multinational institutions—is the extent to which they give priority to satisfying their corporate business customers over the credit demands of other sectors of the economy [Brimmer wrote]. Because of this strong network of customers’ relationships, the banks—in fact—set priorities that are not necessarily consistent with the overall objectives of public policy.11

The other governors dismissed Brimmer’s ideas as unworkable. The private banking system, they argued, must be free to set the priorities for new credit, even if the banks were pushing in a direction contrary to the Fed’s own objectives.

When money became scarce, resourceful bankers had ways to obtain more of it, despite the rising price, and to amply finance their new loans. Typically, they would sell off government securities to raise funds for lending and raise the market rate offered on their own certificates of deposit—in effect, luring away the deposit money that was fleeing from credit unions and S & L’s.

The bankers also borrowed more from the Federal Reserve itself, simply by phoning the Discount window officer at one of the twelve Federal Reserve Banks. Discount borrowing soared shortly after the October 6 announcement to more than $3 billion a day, subsided for several months and then reached another peak later of $3.5 billion a day. The Fed’s decision to raise the Discount rate to 12 percent hardly discouraged bankers from “going to the window,” as they called it. When the alternative was borrowing in the money market where short-term rates were bouncing as high as 18 percent, the Fed’s Discount rate was still a bargain.

In theory and myth, the Federal Reserve’s Discount lending was the power of life or death over private banks. If a bank relied too much on the Discount privilege, the Fed could simply refuse its request for a loan—threatening the bank with crisis and possibly insolvency. In practice, the central bank rarely, if ever, said no at the Discount window. A bank might be scolded, perhaps subjected to a rigorous examination or told to “stay away from the window” until its affairs were in order. But the Federal Reserve would not refuse to make a Discount loan unless it had concluded that the bank was already doomed. The Fed’s original purpose was to prevent bank failures, not cause them, a reality that aggressive bankers regularly exploited.

One other source of new money available to the banks was more important than all the others—the pool of expatriate dollars that the Federal Reserve did not control, the unregulated funds known as the Eurodollar market. For the largest multinational banks, which had ready access through their own foreign branches, Eurodollar borrowing was a fundamental means of evading the Fed’s tightening. Chase Manhattan, Citibank, Morgan Guaranty and the others borrowed “offshore” to finance their own domestic lending, and they also re-lent the funds to regional banks, which didn’t have direct access to the Euromarket themselves.

The Euromarket pool was as large as $800 billion, according to an estimate by the Morgan bank.12 The funds were not subject to reserve requirements imposed by central banks or any other government regulation, and, therefore, the Eurodollar pool was an attractive place for international banks, both foreign and American, and the global corporations to park their money. The “offshore” label, in fact, was largely a bookkeeping fiction. Eurodollar transactions were executed in New York City or Chicago as easily as in London (the fiction was largely discarded in 1981 when America’s multinational banks were permitted to operate unregulated “international banking facilities” in the U.S.—a foreign branch, in other words, that was located right at the home office).

For monetary policy, the crucial point was that the Eurodollar pool provided the largest banks with a safety valve—a place to raise funds when domestic money was growing scarce. Some of the borrowed money that entered the U.S. economy this way would show up as domestic bank deposits and thus be counted in the American money supply, but a lot of it would not, since the loans could be carried on the books of foreign branches of the U.S. banks or the foreign subsidiaries of the American corporations who borrowed the money.

For the commercial banks, the Eurodollar pool was a safety valve. For the Federal Reserve, it was a huge leak in the plumbing. The money flowed into the American financial system when domestic credit was scarce and interest rates were rising or flowed out again when supply was in excess. The Fed did not control it either way. Even the Fed’s experts found it impossible to be precise about how large the leakage from offshore was, but Governor Wallich estimated the added amount for 1978 at roughly $50 billion—imported money that, he said, “to all intents and purposes should be viewed as part of the U.S. money supply.”

A leakage of $50 billion could effectively add nearly 15 percent to the size of M-l, the basic aggregate of spending money that was used as the principal measure of the U.S. money supply. The Federal Reserve, in comparison, was attempting to hold M-l to a growth rate of less than 5 percent. The Fed’s technicians tried to reckon with the inflow of Eurodollars and compensate for it. “If we ignore it,” Wallich said, “the rate of growth of the total dollar supply, combining the U.S. and the Euromarket, would be rising faster than we think.”

But, given the system as it existed, the Fed could only go so far in offsetting the money that banks imported from offshore balance sheets. Wallich acknowledged the inhibition:

The Federal Reserve could, of course, adjust the domestic targets so as to keep the combined amount of domestic and Euromoney on the right track. But as the Eurodollar market grows, the Federal Reserve would have to bear down increasingly hard on the domestic supply of money and credit in order to offset the expansion of Eurodollars. This would work a hardship on our domestic economy and particularly on U.S. borrowers who did not have access to the Euromarket.13

When the Federal Reserve Board adopted the special marginal reserve requirement on managed liabilities at its October 6 meeting, it was trying to plug this leakage—raising the cost for bankers who turned to the Eurodollar market for funds, but it did not seem to have much impact.

The new control on managed liabilities had loopholes and the banks soon discovered them. The October 1979 issue of World Financial Markets, published by Morgan Guaranty, explained how corporate borrowers could get around the added cost. Multinationals could borrow from foreign banks, which weren’t covered by the new reserve requirement, or they could still borrow from American banks, but with different bookkeeping. “Foreign subsidiaries of U.S. companies could approach banks overseas, including the foreign branches of U.S. banks, for credit and then could re-lend the funds to their U.S. parent companies,” the Morgan bank explained. “In this way, domestic borrowers could avoid the cost effects of marginal reserve requirements.”14

Some of America’s most important banks were also ignoring another element of the Federal Reserve’s October 6 pronouncements—the Fed’s admonition to avoid making loans for speculation. In one of its economic roundup stories, The Wall Street Journal reported: “Most banks say they are heeding the Fed’s request to avoid speculative lending—and doing so with little difficulty.”

Edward L. Palmer, chairman of Citibank’s executive committee, assured the Journal: “The marginal and speculative borrower has gone to Miami to sit in the sun.”15 In subsequent weeks, Citibank would lend a total of $115 million to Texas oilman Nelson Bunker Hunt, his brother Herbert and their commodities firm, while the Hunts were furiously buying up silver as the price skyrocketed. The Hunt brothers’ secret goal was to corner the world market in silver and thereby control the price—an effective monopoly that would have driven others to ruin.

U.S. banks and brokerages, despite Volcker’s warnings, joined foreign banks in financing one of the most audacious speculative gambles in history. Silver sold for $10.61 an ounce in August, and by late December the price had nearly tripled. In January, it would peak at $52 an ounce. The price was driven up by inflation, but also by the Hunt brothers’ global purchases. Eventually, they would acquire more than 129 million ounces of silver. The Hunts, though fabulously wealthy oilmen from Dallas, bought most of their silver hoard with borrowed money.

In addition to Citibank, First National of Chicago lent them $70 million directly and First National of Dallas lent $35 million. Another $450 million was lent by First National of Dallas and twenty-nine other banks to the Hunts’ oil company, which, in turn, lent huge sums to the brothers for their silver buying. Major banks were also involved less directly as providers of credit to the brokerage firms that allowed the Hunts to buy vast quantities “on margin.” The banks lent to the brokers and the brokers lent to the Hunts. Bache Halsey Stuart, which nearly went bankrupt when the silver bubble eventually burst and the Hunts could not pay their debts, lent a total of $233 million for the brothers’ silver buying, backed by bank credit from First National of Chicago, Bankers Trust and Irving Trust, among others. E. F. Hutton put up $104 million. Merrill Lynch lent $492 million.16

The Federal Advisory Council had reassured the Fed governors that commercial banks were adhering to the Fed’s warning against speculative lending. “Loans to finance essentially speculative activities in commodity, gold and foreign-exchange markets are being avoided,” the bankers promised in their November meeting with the Fed, “but it is not clear how important they may have been. Most banks would not have financed such activity directly in any period. . . .”17 Their reassurances, to put it mildly, were inaccurate.

The Federal Reserve chairman claimed in later testimony that he was unaware that quite the opposite was occurring. Volcker and the other governors had heard rumors and veiled warnings from the bankers about speculative fever and they read newspaper accounts of the Hunts’ extraordinary activities, but the chairman did not learn the full scope of the banks’ complicity in the speculation until the venture was collapsing in late March of 1980.

Volcker was called out of a Board of Governors’ meeting on March 26 by an urgent call. A desperate executive of Bache, one of the nation’s leading brokerages, telephoned from New York, pleading for intervention by the Fed. Bache, he told Volcker, was about to be bankrupted by falling silver prices. As, the value of their holdings plummeted, the Hunts could not meet the “margin calls,” the requirement to put up more cash against their outstanding loans. Bache would be wiped out if something didn’t happen, Volcker was informed, and a number of major banks were going to suffer huge losses too.

Afterward, Federal Reserve officials shrugged off the fact that their warnings to the banks had been ignored. “We are under no delusions as to what our persuasion will do against the forces of the market,” Governor Wallich explained. “One individual bank may say to us, ‘We would like to go along with you and not make these loans, but everyone else in the market is doing it so we don’t see why we shouldn’t.’” The Federal Reserve, however, easily could have prevented the silver lending and other types of speculative financing by the commercial banks—if it had been willing to impose real controls on the banks’ loan portfolios. Instead, the central bank relied on hortatory messages and voluntary compliance. The banks, for their part, went ahead and lent hundreds of millions for the Hunt brothers’ silver gamble.

The commercial bankers on the Federal Advisory Council were undoubtedly right about one thing: if the domestic money supply was held tight long enough, keeping interest rates high, sooner or later that would produce the desired results. The entire economy would slide into contraction and everyone’s desire for new loans would subside. Then, the competition for money, the uneven contest that pitted the weak against the strong, would abate.

The American economy was like an untamed bull, restlessly charging forward despite the Fed’s best efforts to restrain it. By January of 1980, it was clear that things were not slowing down as expected. The recession, predicted and proclaimed for so many months, was not occurring. Instead, the nation’s economic activity was surging forward, regaining the momentum that had so alarmed Federal Reserve governors back in the early autumn. It was as though the Fed had swung a heavy club and momentarily stunned the rampaging animal, knocked it to its knees with the sharp spike in interest rates. Then the bull got up, shook off the blow and charged on.

Disconcerting as this was for the Federal Reserve governors, the experience had one reassuring element. It demonstrated, once again, the extraordinary strength and resilience of the American economy, a point that was often lost in the public debates over economic performance. Political leaders and economists and the public, as well, usually focused on the grievances and afflictions. They did not dwell on the underlying energy.

In this season, however, the bull was stampeding like a crazed animal. The inflationary pressures that had driven anxious people to buy things on borrowed money now became maddeningly intense. Thanks to another oil price increase and the higher interest rates that raised mortgage costs, the Consumer Price Index rose in January at a staggering annual rate—16.8 percent. Everything else flowed from that: the dollar weakened further, commodity prices reached historic peaks. Gold, that had sold for $400 an ounce in early fall, more than doubled in a few months, a record price of $875. Silver, meanwhile, quintupled. The bond and stock markets suffered new losses.

What Paul Volcker and the Federal Reserve had wrought was without precedent in modern experience. In a few short months, the Fed had nearly doubled the price of money. Despite the technical complexities, that was the essential meaning of Volcker’s operating shift—the dramatic ratchetting upward in interest rates. A few months before, the governors had been arguing over half-percent increases. Now the Fed was pushing the Federal Funds rate from 11 percent toward 20 percent. And other short-term rates followed in step.

Yet the real economy continued expanding despite the declines in the two most interest-sensitive sectors—housing and automobiles. By January, auto sales had dropped to their lowest level since 1975. New starts of home building had shrunk by nearly 20 percent. Other kinds of consumer spending remained surprisingly strong, even though unemployment was beginning to rise and personal incomes were declining. The explanation was debt: families were going deeper in debt to compensate for shrinking incomes. With inflation at 16 percent, borrowing still looked like a good deal.

The Federal Reserve’s new system for controlling the money aggregates had performed exactly as desired at first. The money growth slowed sharply in October and November. Then, in step with bank lending and economic activity, the money supply started expanding more rapidly again in December and January, despite the new operating system and the Fed’s intentions. By February, M-l was growing at a rate of 9 percent, almost as fast as it had back in September.

One point was painfully clear to the Board of Governors: the psychological shock that Volcker thought might reverberate from the October 6 shift had not happened. The chairman had hoped that the dramatic action would alter the financial markets’ cynical expectations about future inflation and, therefore, newly confident investors would demand less of an “inflation premium” for long-term credit. “All those happy thoughts,” Volcker acknowledged, “did not come to pass.”

The Federal Advisory Council delivered the same message at its February meeting. The bankers reported:

The Council commends the Board’s continuing efforts to restrain. . . . However, because of the disparity between past Fed announcements and actual results, whether these deviations were intentional or unavoidable, there is some skepticism in the marketplace that the Fed is resolved to adhere to its stated policies over the long term. This doubt is increased by the simultaneous occurrence of a presidential election and a potential recession.

The other message from the marketplace took the form of a question: if the record level of interest rates induced by the Fed was not enough to slow down the economy, then how high would interest rates have to go in order to do the job? The assumptions made on October 6, when none of the governors imagined that rates would have to go above 16 percent, were clearly mistaken. “The economy was much more resistant to higher interest rates than one would have thought,” Governor Wallich conceded.

Volcker agreed. “There is certainly reality to the fact that credit has continued to flow during this period,” he said. “I think there is also reality to the fact that, horrendous as these interest rates are in respect to our own history, what those people are telling you is that they are willing to borrow at these interest rates because they are so pessimistic about inflation.”18

Volcker called it “a kind of tail-chasing phenomenon.” Housing, for instance, had been hit hardest by the higher rates, yet lenders were still surprised at how many families were willing to take on home mortgages at 13 percent or even higher. “Perhaps it is not so hard to understand,” Volcker said, “when you realize that the prices of houses have been going up at 15 percent or more.”

These pressures could not last. The economy seemed to be headed for a blowoff—like a steam engine that finally pops the seals on its safety valves. But it wasn’t at all clear when or how that would occur. The Federal Open Market Committee expressed its own confusion in its January minutes: “In the judgment of a number of members, a downturn now seemed to be getting under way, but there was also recognition it could be delayed for another quarter or two.” The recession, in other words, might already be started or it might start six months from now.

The FOMC members faced another unpleasant decision. Should they resist the new surge of upward pressures? If they did, it would threaten to push interest rates even higher, way beyond what they had envisioned back in October. If they did not resist, then the skeptics would be confirmed in their assumption that inflation would continue unabated.

In early February, the Federal Open Market Committee agreed to further tighten bank reserves moderately, though the majority assumed that the Federal Funds rate, then trading around 13 percent, would remain below the ceiling of 15.5 percent. The committee’s two most conservative hawks, Governor Coldwell and Governor Wallich, dissented. It wasn’t enough, they argued.

They were right. Two weeks later, the money aggregates were growing much faster and the Fed Funds rate was up to 15 percent. Volcker called a special meeting of the FOMC by telephone, and the twelve committee members agreed to hold tight on bank reserves and raise the ceiling on the Fed Funds rate by one percentage point. It would be allowed to rise as high as 16.5 percent.

That wasn’t enough either. On March 6, that new limit was pierced too—the Fed Funds was trading at 17 percent. Volcker called another telephone conference and the FOMC raised the ceiling to 17.5 percent. The next day, he had to do it again. The Federal Funds rate was now up to 18 percent. The Federal Open Market Committee yielded again and raised its ceiling to match the reality. The Fed Funds rate was allowed to remain at 18 percent—50 percent higher than where it had started in early October when the Fed embarked on its campaign to halt inflation.

Yet the commercial banks continued to pump out new loans at an accelerating pace. They found plenty of willing customers even though the banks’ loan rates were marching upward in track with the money-market rate controlled by the Fed. The prime rate for short-term interest rose swiftly to 18 percent, then 19 percent and would peak at 20 percent. Nine months earlier, in the summer of 1979, the prime had been below 12 percent. The basic cost of borrowing, the price for money, nearly doubled.

And still the recession did not come. Economists kept predicting it, yet they could not see any clear evidence to confirm it. The Fed’s vaunted initiative of October seemed surprisingly impotent and the chatter in financial markets was filled with rumors of impending government controls.

“There was a wave of cumulative pessimism,” the chairman of the Federal Reserve acknowledged. “There was a gathering feeling that things were out of control.”

The political reaction was strangely muted, despite the severity of what Paul Volcker was engineering. Both in Congress and at the White House, Democratic leaders seemed confused and divided, not certain whether to attack or remain silent. On Friday, October 19, two weeks after the Federal Reserve’s dramatic policy changes, the Senate majority leader, Robert C. Byrd of West Virginia, rose to express his concern. The Fed’s new initiatives had some positive aspects, the senator acknowledged, but a regime of tight money and soaring interest rates sounded suspiciously like the bankrupt strategy that Republicans had employed against inflation in 1974, leading to a long, severe recession and massive unemployment. Senator Byrd declared:

Attempting to control inflation or protect the dollar by throwing legions of people out of work and shutting down shifts in our factories and mines is a hopeless policy.

The Congress will be watching closely to ensure that the recession of 1974 and 1975 will not be repeated in 1979 and 1980. We will be watching to see whether the Fed, in casting a net to catch speculative nonproductive investments, is also restricting the flow of credit into vital, productive areas of the economy.

We will watch with concern the impact of this policy on small businesses which depend on credit markets for financing. We will watch its impact on the construction industry which historically is the first sector to feel the shock of tight credit. The Congress will watch the response of bankers and brokers to the Fed’s message of restraint.

The senator’s speech, in the nature of congressional politics, was like a polite warning shot across the bow. The Democratic leader of the Senate majority was putting Paul Volcker and the Federal Reserve on notice: if the Fed squeezed too hard, it could expect vigorous opposition from the governing party in Congress, which held ultimate legislative authority over the independent central bank.

But, early in the following week, another important senator rose to deliver a strong defense of the Fed and an implicit scolding for the majority leader. William Proxmire of Wisconsin, chairman of the Senate Banking Committee, had endorsed Volcker’s initiatives immediately, conceding that the Fed was applying “strong medicine” but praising its courage. “As strong medicine is needed and as no one else is willing or has the fortitude to bell the cat,” Proxmire said, “we should support the Federal Reserve when it acts. The Federal Reserve has no other choice.”

Senator Proxmire had special influence, not simply because he chaired the committee that exercised oversight on monetary policy, but because he was among the limited number in Congress who understood the subject. Without naming Senator Byrd as the target of his remarks, Proxmire delivered a short lecture on inflation and interest rates. At 15 percent inflation, an investor lending $1 million at 10 percent “loses” $50,000 a year. “You cannot count on the lender being a complete idiot,” Proxmire said. Sooner or later, he will stop lending at low interest rates and invest the money himself in commodities or real estate.

This policy is going to cause pain [Proxmire emphasized]. Anybody who says we can do it without more unemployment or more recession is just deceiving you or is deceiving himself, because there is no way you can do it without more unemployment, without some business failures you would not otherwise have, without serious farm losses. . . .

As I say, this is a bad policy from the standpoint of sacrifice and it hurts many, many Americans, hundreds of thousands, millions of them. But we ought to either come up with an alternative or say that we are not interested, really, sincerely in fighting inflation. . . .

Thus rebuked, Senator Byrd returned to the subject on the Senate floor the next day. His tone was conciliatory and considerably more generous toward the Federal Reserve.

“I believe we need to give the Fed’s new approach a chance to work,” Senator Byrd agreed. “I see no reason to declare the program a failure when, essentially, its success or failure depends on the prudence with which it is implemented.”19

Senator Byrd’s uncertain foray into the thicket of monetary policy was typical. Some others in Congress expressed misgivings but did not persist, while the most influential liberal voices—Senator Prox-mire and Representative Henry Reuss, chairman of House Banking— endorsed the Volcker campaign as “constructive.” Many potential critics were intimidated by these endorsements. Like farmers in Iowa or small-business men in Virginia, many members of Congress simply did not understand the technical aspects well enough to comment one way or the other. And many agreed with Proxmire: if Congress was not going to do anything about inflation itself, then it should hold its tongue while the Fed tackled the unpleasant task.

Some politicians, when constrained by such circumstances, were tempted to seize upon issues they did understand and make the most of them. Less than a week after launching its new targeting system, the Federal Reserve reported an abnormal surge of $3.7 billion in the money supply, then with considerable embarrassment retracted the number when it discovered that one major bank, Manufacturers Hanover, had misreported its own balances. The House Banking Committee held a special hearing to investigate what was an irrelevant aberration.

“The nation can’t count on the Fed when the Fed can’t count,” Representative George Hansen of Idaho thundered. “How do you explain to people who have been hurt by interest and discount rates and lack of available money that it was all a mistake? That the economic doctors at the Fed are so careless that they have miscounted the money supply by nearly $4 billion?” Fed Vice Chairman Schultz patiently endured a barrage of angry denunciations while the committee members demonstrated their zeal as watchdogs of the Federal Reserve.20

At the White House, the President’s public responses to the Federal Reserve’s new policy also seemed confused or evasive. At a press conference, Jimmy Carter offered a vague endorsement but attempted to direct press attention to his own anti-inflation effort, the new “national accord” on wages and prices. His attempt failed; the accord disappeared and was soon forgotten. Carter’s political future was immediately threatened by Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts, leader of the liberal wing of the Democratic Party, who was about to announce that he would challenge the incumbent President for the Democratic nomination in 1980. Kennedy’s central complaint was against Carter’s fiscal policy, his refusal to increase spending for the domestic social programs that liberals championed. But a new Gallup poll reported an especially ironic finding: the public, by a 2-to-1 margin, thought Kennedy would be more effective than Carter at reducing inflation.

In San Diego, addressing the convention of the construction trade unions, Carter tried to distance himself from the Fed. “I reject the advice of those who think the only way to cure inflation is to throw millions of people out of work,” the President declared. “This has been done in the past by Administrations before mine, but I guarantee you that I will not fight inflation with your jobs.”

Later, when a television interviewer in New Jersey asked him if the Fed had gone too far with higher interest rates, the President replied: “As you well know, I don’t have control over the Fed, none at all. It’s carefully isolated from any influence by the President or the Congress. This has been done for many generations and I think it’s a wise thing to do.”21

Inside the White House, the gloom was almost palpable. On October 31, the President presided over a senior staff meeting including his economic advisers and Vice President Walter F. Mondale. The economists sketched out their expectations and they were all grim.

Lyle Gramley of the Council of Economic Advisers thought there would be a mild recession in 1980 with unemployment rising close to 8 percent, though he added that some private forecasters expected worse. Charles Schultze, CEA chairman, was more pessimistic. Schultze told the President that unemployment would reach 8 to 8.5 percent, that the Consumer Price Index would hit a new peak of 17 to 19 percent in January or February, accompanied by even higher interest rates and recession.

The President was upset. Weren’t there any options, he asked, that might keep the economy from drifting into these consequences? Not in the short run, Schultze said, not by conventional means.

Vice President Mondale spoke up. He was alarmed by these grim forecasts. If nothing was done, he said, the economic suffering would drive the Carter Administration from office next year.

The President agreed. The White House economists, he said, had described a scenario for a change of Administrations in 1980. There must be alternatives, some positive steps that at least would allow him to offer hope to the public.

The economists held back. There were no easy solutions, one of them said. Jimmy Carter pressed them for ideas. All the options haven’t been explored, the President insisted. Give us a program. Even if it won’t work, at least we can offer hope.

Schultze and other economists listed some unconventional alternatives—the imposition of controls on wages and prices or on the expansion of credit, new tax laws to push business and labor toward greater restraint, a new gasoline tax or decontrol of oil prices to discourage energy consumption.

The President ordered his staff to draw up a program, one that might include several of the alternatives that had been discussed, a tighter federal budget to demonstrate fiscal restraint, a gasoline tax and, finally, some kind of program for government controls over the economy’s inflationary pressures.

The grim forecasts offered at the October 31 meeting would prove to be quite accurate. But, for some months, nothing much happened to the President’s demand for a new plan of action. Four days afterward, a different sort of crisis distracted the White House. On November 4, a mob of Iranian students seized the American embassy in Tehran and took more than sixty Americans hostage there, the beginning of a drama that would preoccupy Jimmy Carter and his senior staff throughout their final year in the White House.

The political future of Jimmy Carter was also in the thoughts of the Federal Advisory Council. When the twelve bankers met again at the Fed on November 1, they were unanimously supportive of the October 6 tightening. But the bankers pointedly warned the Federal Reserve governors they must resist any election-year political pressures to ease off.

There is wide concern about the Fed’s resolve in adhering to this policy in the face of an election year and the increasing likelihood of a recession [the bankers advised]. If strong words and actions are not followed by results, then holders of dollar-denominated financial assets in the U.S. and abroad will conclude that the recent changes are no more significant than the statements and policy changes of prior years which did not reduce inflation. When rhetoric sufficed several years ago, tangible proof is now required of the Fed’s intentions.

Otherwise, the bankers’ council thought the Fed was on track. Consumer optimism had “cooled” in the last month, the council reported. The outlook for housing was “dismal.” Mortgage lending had been tightened and business loans were being monitored and priced more carefully. All in all, the bankers concluded: “The recent changes in the administration of monetary policy are viewed by the Council as both significant and beneficial.”22





