5 THE LIBERAL APOLOGY


Wh en G. William Miller became chairman in 1978, he decided to break the deadlock on a long-festering problem that confronted the Federal Reserve System. Its membership was shrinking. Each year, a few dozen or more commercial banks would decide that the benefits of Fed membership were outweighed by the cost and they would withdraw. The total had fallen from six thousand to about fifty-six hundred and everyone understood why. The Fed paid no interest on the reserve balances that commercial banks were required to maintain at the twelve Federal Reserve Banks. If bankers withdrew and placed themselves under state banking regulation, the required reserve levels would be lower and, more important, the money would be kept at a correspondent bank, where it could be invested in income-producing securities.

The Fed’s refusal to pay interest on reserves “constitutes a discriminatory tax,” the Federal Advisory Council complained, expressing a grievance long felt by the member banks. The “tax” on Fed banks was actually only lost opportunity—the interest income they did not earn on the idle reserve funds—but the burden of this “opportunity cost” naturally increased during the 1970s as inflation pushed up interest rates. The bankers’ distress increased proportionately.

Since Congress had failed to deal with the issue, Chairman Miller decided to take unilateral action. He informed the chairmen of the House and Senate banking committees that the Federal Reserve would henceforth begin paying interest to its member banks on their reserve balances. The response from Capitol Hill was swift and strong. Representative Reuss called the Fed’s congressional liaison with a message for the chairman: if Miller dared to do this, Reuss would introduce a resolution to impeach him.

The bankers’ complaints about the “hidden tax” imposed on them by Federal Reserve membership left out several offsetting benefits they enjoyed. Thanks to Fed membership, these commercial banks enjoyed a safety net not available to any other business sector—the emergency borrowing available through the Fed’s Discount window. If they got into a corner, a temporary liquidity shortage or more serious problems, relief was only a phone call away. That protection from failure, though impossible to quantify, was worth quite a lot. The member banks also received free services from the Fed in their use of the check-clearing and payments system. And, from the congressional point of view, it took real chutzpa for banks to complain about “taxes” since they paid so little compared to other business sectors. In 1980, the effective federal income-tax rate on financial institutions was only 5.8 percent, compared with 34.1 percent for retailing, 24.5 percent for electronics and appliance manufacturing, 16.4 percent for aerospace, 10.9 percent for utilities. The only business sectors with lower effective tax rates than banks were two that were in serious trouble, airlines and wood products.

Nevertheless, Miller won his point. Since 1913, membership had been voluntary, and now commercial banks were leaving the Fed at an accelerating rate. As interest rates rose, many more banks threatened to follow. If this continued, the Fed argued, its control over the money supply would be weakened. Miller acceded to the congressional objections and agreed not to pay interest on reserves, but Reuss and Proxmire, the two banking chairmen, committed themselves to finding a legislative solution.

The ultimate result was the Monetary Control Act of 1980, enacted just as the Fed was driving interest rates to historic peaks. The legislation required all depository institutions, member banks and nonmember banks alike, savings and loan associations, even credit unions, to maintain reserves with the Fed. The imposition of universal reserve requirements was presented to Congress as an arcane question of monetary management, the sort of issue few members of Congress cared much about or understood. In reality, the Fed membership issue was a political question, only marginally relevant to economics. Passage of the Monetary Control Act had very little to do with how effectively the Federal Reserve could control the supply of money. Its purpose was to protect the Federal Reserve’s political base.

The central bank, supposedly above politics, maneuvered as adroitly as any private interest group to secure this prize—a historic consolidation of its institutional power. It mobilized the lobbying support of its own infrastructure, the influential network of bankers and businessmen associated with the twelve Federal Reserve Banks. It reluctantly endorsed lucrative concessions to its own favored constituency, the largest money-center banks. It deftly pressured other financial interests to fall in line and accept the terms. As a government agency manipulating Congress, the Federal Reserve was as formidable as the Pentagon.

Still, it was extraordinary that the Fed could realize this long-sought goal at the very time it was imposing such drastic conditions on the private economy. Its legislative victory was possible because the Federal Reserve’s agenda was riding piggyback on a much larger cause whose time had finally arrived—the deregulation of finance. In companion legislation, Congress repealed virtually all of the remaining government limits on interest rates, political regulation of lending that had existed since the New Deal. The price of money was free at last —free to seek whatever level the marketplace dictated.

The prime rate was already above 15 percent in the opening weeks of 1980 when the deregulation legislation reached final passage. The Democratic-controlled Congress went ahead, nevertheless, and voted overwhelmingly for the package, which, in other times, they would have denounced as Republican and retrograde. The social implications were obvious: borrowers, businesses and consumers would pay higher interest rates and creditors would enjoy higher returns on their wealth.

Banks would henceforth be permitted to pay interest on checking deposits—with the so-called NOW accounts—in order to lure deposit money back from the money-market funds. The Fed’s Regulation Q, which for several decades had imposed arbitrary limits on how much interest banks and savings and loans could pay on savings deposits, was to be phased out. The S & L’s, given an interest-rate edge over commercial banks in order to encourage mortgage lending and broader homeownership, were stripped of their advantage—forced to compete on “a level playing field,” as the bankers liked to put it. State usury laws—which prohibited interest rates from rising above acceptable levels—were unilaterally suspended by act of Congress.

If the timing seemed odd, the politics was obvious to even the densest member of Congress. Financial deregulation had been gestating for more than a decade and passage was now assured by the convergence of powerful interests. Inflation had sufficiently damaged the holders of financial wealth, including “small savers” of modest means, that even liberal Democrats felt compelled to offer them relief. Commercial banks, led by the largest institutions, argued for the principle of free-market competition. Those who would be hurt—labor, small businesses, many S & L’s and smaller banks—protested feebly, but their voices were lost in the rush to consensus.1

And the Federal Reserve joined in the lobbying with its own political objective—achieving the universal reach over banks that it had been denied since 1913. Volcker and other Fed officials actually had fundamental doubts about the wisdom of financial deregulation, knowing that the elimination of Washington’s interest-rate ceilings would probably weaken the Fed’s own control over the expansion of credit. In the heat of the legislative struggle, Volcker and others at the Fed kept these worries to themselves. For them, financial deregulation offered a rare opening and they seized it.

Paul Volcker, like his predecessors, Miller and Arthur Burns, took up the cause of universal reserve requirements and repeatedly warned Congress that shrinking membership was atrophying the Fed’s “fulcrum for the conduct of monetary policy”—the base of bank reserves that it manipulated to control the money supply. “As attrition causes the total amount of reserves held at Federal Reserve Banks to decline,” Volcker warned, “the ‘multiplier’ relationship between reserves and money increases tends to become less stable. Consequently, fluctuations in the amount of reserves supplied—and these fluctuations inevitably have a range of uncertainty—can cause magnified and unintended changes in the money supply.”

By early 1980, Volcker portrayed the danger as imminent. In recent months, he testified in February, 69 banks with $7 billion in deposits had left the System. Another 320 banks were “considered certain or probable to withdraw,” he said, and 350 more were “actively considering withdrawal.” If all of those did indeed leave the Fed, the deposits covered by the Federal Reserve’s management would decline from 70 percent of the entire banking system to 64 percent. Eventually, the Fed claimed, its membership coverage would fall as low as 57 percent of U.S. deposits. Congress must act.2

It sounded ominous to those who did not understand the complex hydraulics of the money supply. But to monetary economists, Volck-er’s claims were arguable at best and, to many of them, quite spurious. Logically, they pointed out, it did not matter whether the Fed’s “fulcrum” covered 70 percent of the banking system or 50 percent or even much less. Since the Fed was the only source that could originate money creation, its actions to inject or withdraw reserves would be transmitted automatically through every channel of the banking system, affecting credit conditions and interest rates for everyone, regardless of where banks kept their reserves.

Everyone agreed, in any case, that the largest money-center banks would never give up their Fed membership, and they were the core of the banking system. The fifty or so largest banks held half of all U.S. deposits and were intimately linked to all others as their correspondent banks, the place where non-Fed banks held their reserves, where smaller banks parked their surplus funds or turned for help. The money-center banks needed the Fed membership both for the Fed’s payments system and because they, most of all, depended on the Fed’s Discount lending to manage their own liquidity. As long as these core banks were under the Fed’s supervision, it would have a reliable handle on the entire banking system.

Governor Henry Wallich, the most scholarly monetary theorist on the Board of Governors, was among the many economists who thought the Fed membership issue was a nonexistent problem, at least as a threat to monetary control.

“I’ve always thought this was a red herring,” Wallich confessed. “Ultimately, I think we can run the economy without any reserve requirements. Some other central banks do it. When I was a director of a bank in New Haven [while teaching at Yale], I said to the managers: ‘Look, it’s profitable for us to get out of the Federal Reserve System.’ And they later did that.”

Even with the October 1979 shift in operating methods, Wallich argued, the Fed could still exercise adequate control over reserves with a much smaller number of member banks. During the congressional debate, Wallich did not broadcast his views. Instead, he deferred to the political position staked out by the Federal Reserve and its chairman. “It’s easier for me to say this as a theorist,” he explained, “than it is for Paul Volcker, who has to go before the congressional committees and talk to the banks and bear the brunt of the complaining.”

A senior executive of the New York Federal Reserve Bank shared Wallich’s skepticism about the threat of shrinking membership, as did many others within the System. “It was an article of faith in the System that it did matter,” the New York official said, “but a lot of people think it doesn’t. I’ve never been convinced it does myself. Logically, we could operate just as effectively if only a small number of banks had accounts with us or maybe even if only brokers had accounts with us.”

The commercial banks, however, were also the core of the Federal Reserve’s political base, the clientele whom it served and who, in turn, defended the Fed’s independence. As more banks, large and small, resigned from the System, the System lost the supporters who helped to protect it from political attack. “There wasn’t any question,” the New York Fed official allowed, “that the membership provided us with a constituency we could ill afford to lose.”

“It would destroy the Fed’s political base,” explained Kenneth A. Guenther, who was the Federal Reserve Board’s congressional liaison throughout the episode. Guenther compared the Fed’s political constituency of large and small banks to a naval deployment—“four hundred of the largest battleships surrounded by thousands of little PT boats.” The battleships were the essential element for monetary control, but the PT boats provided crucial protection. They were the smaller banks, scattered across the nation in small towns and cities where the bankers were typically much closer to hometown political leaders, including the local congressman, than a mega-banker like Citibank’s Walter Wriston or Chase Manhattan’s David Rockefeller would be.

Without the picket ships to protect them, the Fed and the money-center banks would be more vulnerable to political whim and the residual popular hostility directed at concentrated power (the political profile of banking resembled the oil industry: thousands of independent producers surrounded the major oil companies and were often more influential, whereas the “majors” like Exxon or Mobil were convenient symbols of corporate power and greed that political critics invoked when attacking the industry). “If you have four hundred of the largest battleships surrounded by thousands of PT boats,” Guenther observed, “then someone is really risking political trouble to tamper with them.”

The Federal Reserve’s self-interest in maintaining this broad base of support was obvious. But, in more subtle terms, liberal Democrats also saw an interest in preserving it. One of the damning complaints against the Federal Reserve, from the beginning, in 1913, was that it became the captive of the largest banks in Wall Street and the other financial centers. The Fed was too subservient to their demands, critics said, and too indifferent to the concerns of smaller institutions or competing interests in the American economy. Yet the Fed’s institutional bias toward bigness would likely become stronger if its constituency was narrowed to only the biggest and most important banks. Democratic cosponsors, in particular, were worried by this prospect.

“I don’t think anybody in the Federal Reserve System felt you needed more than the four hundred largest banks to operate,” Guenther said, “but the Democrats were totally opposed to that. It would make the Federal Reserve the creature of the four hundred largest banks and destroy its democratic base.”3

To settle on the final terms for mandatory reserves, the sponsors engaged, over many months, in a three-sided dance of persuasion and bargaining—the Fed, the various banking interests and the congressional leaders, all negotiating with one another. To pass its legislation, the Fed had to assemble an enthusiastic coalition of bankers, and that required first Miller and then Volcker to offer some enticements to the various interests. As it happened, the final terms would resemble the outline first suggested by the Federal Advisory Council in the spring of 1979, though the banker-advisers did not get everything they wanted. When the legislation was finally enacted, the Federal Advisory Council was still complaining that it should have been more generous to the Fed’s member banks and more punitive for their rivals.

The most important enticement offered to the Fed’s member banks was a substantial reduction in their reserves. The Federal Reserve agreed that if it won universal coverage for all banks, then the existing level of reserve requirements could be lowered for everyone. In the end, after much bargaining, the reserves that banks had to hold on demand deposits, the checking accounts that were the core of their funds, were reduced from 16.25 to 12 percent. The Fed’s reserve holdings actually shrank from $27 to $16 billion. In other words, the Fed member banks would enjoy a huge dividend in freed-up funds on which they could now earn interest income—while their competitors, the nonmember banks, would be subjected, for the first time, to the “tax” implicit in Fed reserves. (Bankers on the Federal Advisory Council argued for an even greater bonus—a reserve level of only 8 percent.)

The reserves reduction, if nothing was done to offset it, would mean a substantial loss in revenue for the U.S. Treasury. This could be most embarrassing at a time when Volcker and the financial markets were urging Congress to reduce federal deficits to curb inflation. The Federal Reserve’s operating budget was entirely independent of congressional control, but each year the Fed paid a large dividend to the Treasury ($9.3 billion in 1979), which was its surplus income after operating costs. The Federal Reserve’s income came mainly from the interest on its holdings, including the reserve balances posted by banks, which were invested in U.S. government notes and bonds. The Fed held a little less than 15 percent of all the outstanding debt paper issued by the federal government. Thus, if its pool of bank reserves was reduced, the Federal Reserve’s annual income would be smaller and it would have less money to rebate to the Treasury.

Actually, the Fed’s annual dividend to the Treasury seemed like money on a merry-go-round. Every year, like any private investor, the Fed collected interest payments from the Treasury on the U.S. securities it owned. Then at year’s end the Fed gave most of the money back to the Treasury. This was more than mere bookkeeping. In effect, as any commercial banker might bitterly point out, American taxpayers were saving money by using the bankers’ funds.

The solution for the potential revenue loss was to require the Federal Reserve to start charging banks for its services—the daily checkclearing and allied processes. These banking services cost an estimated $400 million a year, and if the Fed priced them at the full cost, that would restore most of the loss. The final trade-off ended up costing the Treasury about $200 million, rising to nearly $600 million a year by 1985 when the new reserve rules would be fully phased in. The larger money-center banks, though they would pay more for Fed services, welcomed the change. Many of them were launching their own service systems for banks in competition with the Fed, and this would make it easier for them to lure away customers.

At the core of the private bargaining, the Federal Reserve acquiesced to a deal with a delegation from the major New York banks. If the Fed would drop entirely its reserve requirement on time and savings deposits, the bankers proposed to Congressman Reuss, they would use their influence to win a legislative endorsement from the American Bankers Association. The concession on reserve requirements would mean a vast return for these bankers; their balance sheets depended heavily on large-denomination CDs. Reuss accepted and the Fed reluctantly went along—and the money-center bankers delivered on their end of the bargain. The ABA endorsed the legislation, despite many protests from regional banks and state-level affiliates.

“We had to placate the small banks and the regional banks and the money-center banks—all of them,” Reuss explained. The Federal Reserve, he added, was simultaneously trying to protect its own interests while also looking out for the banks. “Axilrod [the Fed staff director] would throw new formulas into the hopper,” Reuss said. “Volcker, under Axilrod’s guidance, was always trying to get something more for the banks.”4

In congressional combat, the Federal Reserve had what amounted to a secret weapon, an unseen political resource that it mobilized for every crucial roll call—the officers and directors of the twelve Federal Reserve Banks plus the board members for twenty-five branch offices in smaller cities. The central bank, as even Volcker acknowledged when pressed, could function perfectly well without any of these subsidiaries. But, in political terms, they provided a network of influential strategically scattered across America—available for discreet lobbying in behalf of the Fed.

Coast to coast, the Fed directors included an extraordinary cross section of important people: a sprinkling of academics and at least one labor leader, but mostly corporate executives and bankers. High-powered names in the Fed family included Filene’s and Connecticut General Life Insurance in the Boston district, Union Carbide, Allied Chemical and Union Pacific in New York, Westinghouse in Cleveland, Middle South Utilities in Atlanta, Boeing and Kaiser Aluminum in San Francisco, to mention a few. The Fed’s home office in Washington went through elaborate charades to convince the regional directors that their economic advice was vital to the System’s monetary decisions. In fact, it was not. What was important was their willingness to support the Fed in politics.

“The banks don’t need boards of directors, but this is another way to get the movers and shakers on your side,” Daniel Brill, the Fed’s former research director, explained. “The chairman will put a lot of personal care into keeping them happy.”5

When each chamber of Congress prepared to vote on the deregulation legislation, the Fed enlisted members from its grassroots network. Pivotal senators or House members were targeted for personal phone calls and letters from the appropriate community leaders back home. Votes were secured and even switched in a most discreet manner. “It was quite effective,” Ken Guenther said. “We got the key players, whether directors or bankers, to move on the situation. They gave us contacts with the key congressional players at the moment of truth.”

Congress went along with the Fed’s proposal, though many legislators probably did not grasp the true meaning of what they were enacting. In the midst of tight money and record-high interest rates, Congress effectively granted a huge windfall to the fifty-six hundred commercial banks that were members of the Federal Reserve System —especially the largest ones. This point was never mentioned in the congressional debates, but following the bankers’ own logic, the Monetary Control Act of 1980 represented a major tax cut for the banks, totaling many billions of dollars. When the new rules were fully phased in, the member banks would be freed of nearly $14.5 billion in reserve requirements—money they could now lend out or invest at market rates. How much was this worth to them? A conservative estimate, assuming the banks earned a return of 10 percent on these funds, suggested that the member banks would enjoy more than $5 billion in added income over the next five years, thanks to this arcane change at the Federal Reserve.6

With all the other disorders in the economy, the raging inflation and the banks’ prime rate at 20 percent, members of Congress might have found it awkward to vote for the Federal Reserve’s measure if it had been advertised as a $5 billion tax cut for banks. The members of the two banking committees were intimately familiar with the implications, however. As the legislative negotiations proceeded, the Fed provided committee members with a running series of computer printouts, listing how much their hometown banks would gain or lose in the bargain.

The biggest winners were the largest banks. The fifty largest banks put up roughly half of the bank reserves, and they would get at least half of the $5 billion. The largest two hundred banks would get nearly three-fourths. The rest, $1.5 billion or so, would be divided among the remaining Fed members, more than five thousand banks.

“It was definitely a big-bank victory,” Guenther said, “that was foisted on the middle-level banks and the nonmember banks, who paid the freight.” The Federal Reserve advanced their big banks’ cause while it also served its own.

A banker and a congressman, typically, felt a natural affinity. Both were civic leaders in their community, and in different ways, both influenced the larger destiny beyond their own affairs. The banker knew the true condition of local commerce on a deep level. The congressman, naturally, consulted him. Despite occasional bombast between them, they needed each other’s favor. The relationship was so elementary and natural that it was seldom mentioned.

Governor Nancy Teeters, coming from a liberal Democratic tradition, was surprised to discover this closeness when she served Congress as chief economist for the House Budget Committee. “On the Hill,” she recalled, “I was always amazed at the level of support for the Federal Reserve. It was partly because the way we operate is so arcane they don’t understand it, but also because the members of Congress are so close to the bankers. They see the bankers when they go back to their districts and they listen to them.”

This mutuality—members of the governing elite relying on one another—was reinforced by more tangible forms of symbiosis. Commercial banks and other financial institutions, ranging from the savings and loan industry to major Wall Street brokerages, contributed generously to congressional campaigns, a major source of financing for the politicians. For the 1980 elections, incumbent senators and representatives would receive $2,664,000 in donations from the financial sector. The largest share of that money, nearly $590,000, was given to the members of the House and Senate banking committees, the people who drafted banking legislation.

In addition, many members of Congress were themselves involved in finance. More than one-fourth of the Congress owned a direct stake in financial enterprises. In 1980, 129 House members and 38 senators reported that they earned part of their income from stock shares in commercial banks, S & L’s and other financial institutions. As a private interest of congressmen and senators, ownership of financial institutions far exceeded their holdings in manufacturing, law firms, or oil and gas. Even some elected representatives were engaged in finance beyond the passive ownership of bank stocks. Forty House members and four senators were active as directors, officers or partners of commercial banks, S & L’s and investment companies.7

Finance was, therefore, in the front rank of political influence. As a general rule, if all the various interests in the financial sector reached agreement on banking legislation, then Congress would dutifully pass it. The long stalemate on deregulation essentially resulted from the intramural rivalry among the different financial institutions themselves, each holding out for competitive advantage. Once the contending interests in finance reached a fragile consensus on the terms, the legislation was passed.

Interest rates were decontrolled and commercial banks were free to compete more aggressively for deposits. Small-town bankers resented giving up the “free money” of interest-free checking deposits, but larger banks insisted on it to preserve their competitive position. For years, bankers had portrayed themselves as embattled—surrounded by unregulated competitors like the money-market funds that siphoned off their loan customers and depositors. Their anxieties were no doubt sincere but, as Federal Reserve officers sometimes gently pointed out, not entirely consistent with the facts. Commercial banks were not losing market shares but actually gaining moderately (though perhaps not as fast as entrepreneurial bankers wished). The banks’ share of total credit-market debt claims was 30.6 percent in 1979, higher than in 1959, when it was 27.3 percent. Bank profits were down somewhat in the late 1970s but still looked quite strong compared to the long-run performance. The average return on equity was 11.5 percent in 1979, not an especially good year, compared to only 8.3 percent twenty years before. If bankers felt squeezed, they seemed to be coping admirably with their stress.

Most of the four thousand savings and loans were not coping as well. For many years, the S & L’s had used their own political clout to hold off deregulation, but inflation and rising interest rates had so weakened their balance sheets that they could no longer resist the bankers’ lobbying. “They’re going to go out of business anyway if they can’t adapt,” Senator Proxmire, the banking chairman, said.8 The thrifts were compelled to give up the interest-rate differential imposed by law that had made their savings accounts more attractive than the banks’. In exchange, they were given limited solace—the right to expand their lending into business ventures that were more profitable (and also more risky) than home mortgages. Most thrifts did not like it, but they did not have much choice. “They were reduced to a state of sullen neutrality,” Kenneth McLean, staff director of the Senate Banking Committee, explained.9

Traditionally savings and loans had been given a protected status and an implicit subsidy so they would provide adequate financing for homeownership—at affordable rates. Now, in effect, they were told to become more like their old rivals, the commercial banks, and to compete with them head to head. “It’s a matter of survival of the fittest,” Representative Reuss, the House Banking chairman, proclaimed.10 More than a thousand S & L’s would lose the struggle to survive—closed or merged within the next few years. Instead of improving their balance sheets, another thousand would sink further “under water.”

As these weaker lending institutions failed, the larger banking organizations would acquire the remains—a steady consolidation of financial power that enabled Citibank, Chemical, Chase Manhattan and others to build the beginning structures of nationwide banks, preparing for the day when Congress finally would make them legal. During the debates, A. W. Clausen, president of the Bank of America, largest in the nation, complained that America’s financial industry was still “dominated by mom-and-pop stores.” For better or worse, financial deregulation would hasten their demise.

“Freeing the thrift and mortgage markets from government subsidy and guarantee,” Albert Wojnilower observed, “is like freeing family pets by abandoning them in the jungle.”11

The Democratic majority, given its heritage, might still have resisted deregulation, despite the consensus among financial interests. Organized labor was opposed, as it had always been; so were the home builders and other interest groups allied with the housing industry. But the political resistance was worn down and finally overwhelmed by inflation.

“If you save money, you lose,” Senator Proxmire observed caustically in the debate. “It is ridiculous for the savings rate to be a maximum of percent at a bank for a small saver or 5Vfe percent at a savings and loan, when the inflation rate, as we all know, is about 13 percent.” The Senate committee report also used strong language: “. . . Regulation Q now sanctions blatant discrimination against the small saver to justify its continued existence. It is grossly unfair. . . . Small savers should not be forced by a system of government rate controls to subsidize borrowers.”12

Defending the “small saver” sounded like helping the very people the Democratic Party had always spoken for. This was not quite the case, as Senator Robert Morgan of North Carolina and the handful of other dissenters pointed out. “The majority of consumers, with or without savings, particularly families of low income, including one-half of the elderly families, would probably suffer a net economic loss,” Morgan predicted.13

The “small savers” whom Democrats wished to help were actually a limited group, mostly above the median income. First of all, 37 percent of American families had no savings account at all. Another 29 percent had savings balances below $2,000. If these families received another 1 to 3 percent interest on their accounts, that would return at most only $60 a year in additional income. Meanwhile, as borrowers, they would of course pay higher interest rates. As consumers, they would also pay higher prices since business was a major beneficiary of the hidden subsidy of interest-rate controls. When businesses had to pay more for credit, the costs would be passed on to their customers.

During the debate, the elderly were frequently invoked as the victims of the government controls—widows and retired couples who depended on their savings and were embittered by inflation. The elderly had worked a lifetime to accumlulate their nest eggs and now they were being cheated out of a fair return.14 The Gray Panthers, among other groups, endorsed the legislation. Citibank put up posters in its lobbies blaming Washington for the bank’s inability to pay higher interest.

Yet the elderly were also divided by their financial status into winners and losers. Half of the elderly households, sixty-five years old or older, had no savings account at all. Another 11 percent had less than $2,000 and would gain very little. Only 29 percent of the elderly had more than $5,000 in savings and stood to receive a significant increase in their incomes from deregulation. The group of older citizens who would benefit, in other words, was much smaller than the old folks who would not.

Like other forms of deregulation that eliminated hidden subsidies and assigned the true costs directly to customers, financial deregulation inevitably benefited the largest customers most and penalized smaller customers proportionately. Half of the families in America, for instance, had checking balances of $500 or less—too small to qualify for the interest payments from NOW accounts.15 But these families would begin paying more for their banking services. To make up the cost of paying interest on NOW accounts, banks introduced a bewildering variety of service fees on regular checking accounts. The consequences were not different from cost efficiencies large users gained from the deregulation of airlines or telephones. The little guys, once protected by government regulation, were free to pay more.

In a larger sense, however, financial deregulation was a contest between the generations, a choice between the old and the young, the claims of the past and the ambitions of the future. Though few focused on it, the issue pitted young people who were just starting out in life against their parents’ generation, older families that were already established, that already owned their own home and perhaps by middle age were accumulating financial savings. The old would lend their money to the young at higher prices than ever before. Young families forming in the 1980s, setting out to buy a car or their first home, would confront credit terms and interest rates that would have terrified their parents, double-digit mortgages and floating rates that left them vulnerable to default.

Homeownership, the central component of what was described as the “American dream,” the main objective of the political controls imposed on finance, would gradually shrink among the population, most dramatically among younger families. By embracing financial deregulation, the Democratic majority was implicitly voting to protect the established interests of older Americans and to reduce life possibilities for the young.

Liberalism, it seemed, was turned upside down. Every important aspect of the 1980 legislation—repealing usury laws, authorizing interest on checking accounts, abolishing rate ceilings—involved the same exchange. The Democratic Party was abandoning the egalitarian agenda that it had embraced for nearly fifty years. The benefits would flow upward on the economic ladder and the costs would flow downward. The past was defended at the expense of the future. This transformation, overwhelmingly endorsed by Democrats after ten years of legislative struggle, could hardly be dismissed as the transient choices of a few party leaders or even explained by the political pressures from the financial industry. Something deeper was at work.

The party of liberalism, one could say, was apologizing for inflation. The Democrats were offering redress to those who had been hurt most, the owners of financial wealth, large or small, whose assets were eroded by nearly fifteen years of price inflation. For years, the party of Roosevelt and Keynes had ducked the question or deflected blame, but as inflation worsened, the disorder was associated indelibly with the expansionary economic strategies of the Democratic Party. The political message implicit in financial deregulation was addressed to those who felt most injured by inflation, the people of relative means who had not been part of the Democratic Party’s traditional constituency. We know you have been hurt, the message said, but we will make it up to you. We will set aside our old agenda and help to restore some of your losses.

Senator Proxmire, who came closest to explicitly stating the new perspective, said:

There is nobody in public office today who does not recognize that the number-one problem of this country is inflation. The way to meet inflation

is to encourage people to save money, to give them a reward. Let us use these interest rates. Nobody likes high interest rates, but if you have them, let us make sure that people get a reward for saving their money, so they do the anti-inflation job they are supposed to do.

The Senate committee report, likewise, expressed the changed thinking among Democrats: “. . . saving has become an unrewarding economic experience. Inflation eats away at savings and erodes savings as a store of economic value. Unfairly low returns on savings discourage savings and encourage current consumption. This is the wrong economic policy at a time when inflation is our No. 1 economic problem.”

In gross terms, the legislation would reward not simply the fabled “small saver” mentioned so often in debate but all creditors—including the wealthiest 10 percent of American families that owned 86 percent of the net financial wealth. Deregulation would help the elderly widow who relied on her small savings account, but it would also improve the interest income for everyone else who owned financial assets. This consequence was discussed only obliquely in debate, and, no doubt, many who voted for financial deregulation did not understand they were effectively raising interest rates for all wealth holders, regardless of where they kept their money.

The explanation was fundamental to the nature of financial markets, where all opportunities for investment compete with one another. Abolishing the regulatory ceilings on savings and checking accounts was like raising the base rate for money—other, unregulated interest rates must rise too in order to maintain their competitive edge. Increasing the bottom-tier savings return would ripple upward through other financial instruments, much the way raising the minimum wage will push up wages for other workers who are already paid much more than the minimum. If unskilled workers get more, then skilled workers can demand more too. While economists would find it impossible to determine the precise impact on interest rates (it might be anywhere from 1 to 3 percent), the effects of deregulation would be evident. Interest rates across the spectrum of lending and investment would remain historically higher in the years ahead, regardless of the level of inflation.

“Just as the price of gasoline is forced up when the crude-oil price increases materially ... so the deregulation of deposit and loan interest-rate ceilings has unleashed much higher levels of interest rates than prevailed under controls,” Albert Wojnilower explained.16 As a practical matter, the higher interest rates functioned as a system of income redistribution—in reverse. Instead of distributing income downward, as Democrats traditionally tried to do, interest moved incomes in the other direction, from borrowers to lenders, from the bottom to the top.

The distribution, roughly speaking, would flow to the 45 percent of American families that owned all of the net financial worth held by individuals. The money would be paid by the 55 percent of American families whose net financial worth was zero or negative and by businesses, large and small. On its face, that seemed like an implausible choice for politicians to make, charging the majority to reward the minority, but in electoral terms it made more sense. The American electorate was becoming more and more skewed in favor of the upper-income voters, as Thomas B. Edsall explained in his book The New Politics of Inequality. As voting participation declined over the last twenty years, it fell most drastically among the alienated citizens with lower incomes. The atrophied electorate that the Democrats faced in 1980 was top-heavy with upper-income, better-educated voters who could articulate their demands and expect a response. Families that earned less than $15,000, for instance, made up 40 percent of the population, but only 33 percent of the active voters. Conversely, families over $25,000 were 29 percent of the population, but they exercised 35 percent of the voting strength. This distortion in the electorate, as it grew stronger through the 1970s, pushed the Democratic Party toward where the votes were—and Democrats listened more earnestly to the grievances of upscale citizens.

The banking legislation of 1980 was not the Democratic Party’s first gesture of apology to these voters. A deep transformation in political values did not begin in one season or with a single issue. The complaints from inflation had been building up for a decade. Fitfully, with rancor and reluctance, Democrats had made a series of limited retreats from their old values, legislative concessions implicitly intended to restore the value of capital lost through inflation. In 1978, Congress cut in half the federal income tax on capital gains, aiding the stockholders whose investments stagnated during the 1970s. The same year, the budget growth for domestic social programs that aided the poor and dependent was halted. Over two decades, the Democratic-controlled Congress had reduced corporations’ share of the federal tax burden from 26 to 12 percent and shifted the burden to individual taxpayers largely through regressive Social Security taxes.17

One way or the other, all these measures reversed the flow of the liberal tradition. Each attempted to give some relief to those on the upper half of the economic ladder. These were not sufficient to satisfy their grievances against inflation. The political struggle would continue. The contest arose on many fronts, from income taxes to monetary policy, addressed to the same fundamental goal, the restoration of capital.

The financial deregulation legislation proved to be an appropriate prelude to the 1980s. The politics of deregulation accurately forecast the political preferences that would prevail in the new decade, which interests would be served and which would be pushed aside. The free-market terms established by the measure cleared the way for finance; unregulated interest rates allowed an era of unprecedented prosperity to unfold for the owners of financial wealth. Other sectors, the ones most dependent on borrowed money, housing, agriculture, industrial production and labor, consumers, would absorb the consequences. What the Democrats had begun reluctantly, a new Republican Administration would continue with relish.

For some years, American society had been engaged in an era of moral liberation, a period when long-standing religious commandments and inherited social taboos fell before the new popular desires. Protestant disapproval of gambling was displaced by multimillion-dollar public lotteries, sponsored by state and local governments. The Catholic sin of abortion was legalized. Pornography, once forbidden and furtive, became freely available. Homosexuality and even prostitution were reconsidered in a more tolerant light. Moral inhibitions that had held authority for centuries were abandoned. Old notions of sinfulness were redefined as largely private matters, no longer subject to public regulation.

In this climate of moral change, American finance was also liberated to do what had once been forbidden. The sin of usury was legalized, by act of Congress. Religious injunctions against usury were as old as the Book of Genesis and given specific definition in American law: lending at interest rates above certain limits was ruinous to the hapless borrower and therefore prohibited. When it enacted financial deregulation, Congress declared that, given the circumstances of double-digit inflation, the usury laws must be set aside. The interest-rate ceilings imposed by state governments on home mortgages were abolished by federal legislation, and the limits on business and agricultural lending were suspended for three years. Many state legislatures, responding to the same pressures, repealed their own usury limits on consumer loans.

Unlike the eclipse of other moral taboos, usury provoked no great controversy when it was decriminalized. The new leniency toward private sexual behavior inspired storms of popular reaction and political movements, but usury provoked little or no reaction. Lending money at ruinous interest rates would now be regarded, like sex, as a “victimless crime,” a private act between consenting adults.

The suspension of the usury laws, though less important than the other provisions, accurately reflected the moral logic that propelled the deregulation package. A deep transformation was under way in the political values shared by American elites, both Democratic and Republican, and it cut across many areas beyond finance. The values inherited from the New Deal—the idea that government would serve as regulator and protector in the raw struggles among private economic interests—were in eclipse. The commitments of liberalism— providing shelter for weaker combatants in the marketplace in order to insure certain social goals—were being displaced. An older faith was reviving and regaining its original hegemony, the belief that social justice was best served by an unfettered free market.

The biblical meaning of usury defined the obligations of those who had accumulated wealth toward others who had none and were in need. It imposed limits on the power that the wealthy could exercise, through lending, over the poor. By 1980, the moral argument was reversed. Creditors were now portrayed in political debate as the victims, the virtuous citizens who were exploited by the political interference. Borrowers were described as morally suspect—people who did not themselves save, whose “speculative” spending was “subsidized” by the virtuous savers. The original social contract implied by the concept of usury—the obligations of wealth toward the needs of others —was inverted. The congressional debate described a new political obligation: the savers must be set free, free to seek the highest rate of return on their money.

Congress, of course, did not debate the moral meaning of usury, but was reacting to the practical consequences of usury laws. As inflation pushed market interest rates higher, the usury ceilings effectively shut down lending in state after state. No one would lend at the old levels, and local commerce was starved for credit. Citizens still believed in the concept, however. In Arkansas, voters twice refused to repeal the usury limit of 10 percent in the state constitution, despite the fact that home mortgages and auto loans were no longer available in the state. Their resistance ultimately was futile. No single state could opt out of the national financial system without paying the unbearable price of economic stagnation.

The moral concept of usury was always in fundamental conflict with the dynamics of capitalism. Usury implied social obligation; capitalism depended on individual gain. When they collided in Western history, the capitalist imperative prevailed. Until the late Middle Ages, the Catholic Church still taught that lending at interest—any interest rate whatever—was a sin against God, “ignominious,” as the Second Lat-eran Council of 1139 described it. Usurers, though they might be wealthy merchants and prominent in Church affairs, were excommunicated and refused burial in Christian ground, condemned with robbers, prostitutes and heretics. Their eternal damnation was described in the most grisly terms: toads and other demons gathered on the usurer’s corpse, plucking silver from his purse and driving the coins into the heart and mouth of the cadaver. The moral offense was profit without work. The usurer sold time, which belonged only to God.

Christian theology eventually yielded to the new reality. By the thirteenth century, the primitive networks of capitalism—specialized production that yielded surplus goods for trade—were flourishing across Europe. To function, even in its simplest forms, capitalism required the linkage across time that credit provided—lending today for transactions that would be completed in the future. The merchant princes who led the great transformation were cast as sinners, and yet their enterprise was demonstrably generating new levels of abundance, multiplying income and wealth beyond the ancient, precarious struggle for subsistence. A theological innovation opened the way for absolution of their sins—the elaboration of purgatory. After death, the souls of condemned usurers might yet be resurrected for eternity through the intervention of prayer and other considerations. Many primitive capitalists plunged forward into sinfulness, counting on purgatory for their eventual salvation. “The birth of purgatory,” the French historian Jacques Le Goff wrote, “is also the dawn of banking.”18

By the sixteenth century, the practice of usury was quite common despite the Church’s lingering disapproval. Emmanuel Le Roy Ladu-rie, another French historian, described the account books of an enterprising farmer-usurer in southern France around 1540:

A typical capitalist at the stage of “primitive accumulation,” Masenx reinvested his profits and made money on everything he turned his hand to. In the first place, he made loans of grain or money at short term and high interest for a month or for a week at a time, and he also practiced the crudest form of usury, “from day to day at his pleasure.” He lent his bordiers (who did not even have sowing seed) the money to marry off a daughter or a sister, and he also furnished, on credit, the silver, the old wine, and the leg of mutton for the wedding feast. He lent money on land, and in time the fields of his debt-ridden clients would help round out Masenx’s own properties.19

Moral contempt for bankers and their power over others would endure across the centuries and into the present time, but the process of capital accumulation established its own justification. The morality was exalted in the Protestant ethic of John Calvin; the mechanics were elaborated by the classical economists who accompanied the rise of industrial capitalism. Bankers were assured that by doing what had once been forbidden they were actually doing good for all.

The payment of interest was the core of the capitalist dynamic—it mobilized idle wealth for productive enterprises. Interest lured savings into new risks, new ventures that would multiply the economic rewards. Investment was the opposite of hoarding, the miser counting gold in his storehouse and oblivious to the needs of others. Investment promised a return to the wealth holder, but it also created new work for others and more goods for general consumption. If successful, the new venture would produce its own surplus of wealth, which, in turn, was fed back into the process of growth and accumulation. Even allowing for failures and the natural depreciation of things wearing out, this recycling process multiplied wealth, compounding the original value. Interest-paying investment linked the past to the future and bankers were the intermediaries.

Eventually, the concept of usury was refined to a more practical standard: a political prohibition against ruinous interest rates. Capital deserved a just return, but it was not free to collect a toll that would guarantee failure for the borrowers. Above a certain level, interest actually depressed the capitalist process and produced stagnation and further concentration of wealth as debtors failed and forfeited their property to the usurious lender.

John Maynard Keynes himself wrestled with the moral contradictions. Keynes deplored high interest rates and the inequitable distribution of wealth and incomes, but he nevertheless celebrated the creative possibilities of capital multiplication. “The power of compound interest over two hundred years,” Keynes wrote, “is such as to stagger the imagination.” In 1930, at the depths of global depression, Keynes wrote a prophetic essay entitled “Economic Possibilities for Our Grandchildren,” which predicted a golden future for mankind, thanks to the labor-saving inventions of science and the driving force of compound interest. Amid the gathering despair, Keynes was able to see that the capitalist economies were on the brink of vast breakthroughs in agriculture and other technologies—advances that would dramatically multiply the productive potential.

“All this means in the long run that mankind is solving its economic problem,” Keynes wrote then. “I would predict that the standard of life in progressive countries one hundred years hence will be between four and eight times as high as it is today.” Ultimately, mankind would be freed of the morbid love of money to confront the deeper questions of human existence—“how to live wisely and agreeably and well.”

The wealth holders would eventually lose their power over others,

Keynes predicted in the conclusion of his most famous work, The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money. Economies operating efficiently at full employment would, in time, produce such an abundant supply of capital that the price for it would fall to very low levels—that is, very low interest rates. This surplus, Keynes believed,

would mean the euthanasia of the rentier and, consequently, the euthanasia of the cumulative oppressive power of the capitalist to exploit the scarcity-value of capital. Interest today rewards no genuine sacrifice, any more than does the rent of land. The owner of capital can obtain interest because capital is scarce. But whilst there may be intrinsic reasons for the scarcity of land, there are no intrinsic reasons for the scarcity of capital. ... I see, therefore, the rentier aspect of capitalism as a transition which will disappear when it has done its work.

In the meantime, he cautioned, human society must be patient with the moral flaws of capitalism. Until the abundance of capital was secured, practical necessity required one to tolerate the inequities of wealth and the exploitation of usurers. “For at least another hundred years we must pretend to ourselves and to everyone that fair is foul and foul is fair; for foul is useful and fair is not,” Keynes explained. “Avarice and usury and precaution must be our gods for a little longer still. For only they can lead us out of the tunnel of economic necessity into daylight.”20

Fifty years later, the Keynesian vision was not fulfilled, of course. The rentier was alive and well, and his demands, as expressed in interest rates, were many times greater than prices that had disturbed Keynes in his day. Yet Keynes was not entirely wrong either. Despite wars and other calamities, the capitalist dynamic had achieved many of the wealth-producing breakthroughs he had envisioned and others he did not foresee. The general “standard of life” was improved dramatically, at least in the industrial world, though the benefits were still distributed quite unevenly. The disparities of wealth and income —and the attendant “gods” of avarice and usury—were now most dramatic on the global scale, among nations rich and poor.

An alternative vision of interest and capital existed in the developing world, springing from the same religious principles. While Americans accepted high interest rates as necessary to commerce, and their elected representatives set aside the legal prohibitions against usury, people in the Islamic world still believed usury was sinful—in the original sense of the word. The Koran, like the Bible, taught that lending at interest was immoral and for the same reasons. In the Moslem nations of the Middle East, however, the original moral meaning of usury survived as an important article of faith, at least among the fundamentalists. Interest income from loans was forbidden. The Islamic societies, notwithstanding the great wealth produced by oil and the accompanying modernization, have never passed through the stages of capitalist development that changed the thinking of Western Christianity. The banking system that existed in the Middle East was largely superimposed by European colonialism, but its values were never accepted by the Moslem faithful.

Starting in the early 1970s, Middle East economists and political leaders began to devise an Islamic alternative to Western banking—a banking system that would serve as intermediary between depositors and borrowers and would raise capital for new ventures, but would not pay or charge interest. Instead, the investor would share equitably in the risk of the enterprise, profiting or losing as a partner with the entrepreneur. Thus, the relationship between creditor and debtor was more equal, more like a limited partnership in Western commerce. The investor is promised a fixed percentage of future profits, but he is not guaranteed that he will receive income or even the full return of his original principal.

A decade later, some thirty Islamic financial institutions were in operation in Egypt, Sudan and the oil-rich Persian Gulf states. Religious advisers were consulted by the bankers designing new financial instruments to make sure the credit transactions did not somehow conceal the forbidden riba, the payment of interest. The total assets of the Islamic banks were relatively small, depending on deposits from the general public, not the estimated surplus of $100 billion from oil income, but the idea was popular.

A study by the Western industrial nations’ Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development explained:

Islamic concepts are different from capitalism by their opposition to excessive accumulation of wealth and, in contradiction to socialism, by their protection of the rights to property, including ownership of the means of production. ... A true Islamic society must not be an arena where opposing interests clash, but rather a place where harmonious relations can be achieved through a sense of shared responsibilities. The individual’s rights must be equitably balanced against those of society at large.

As in Christendom, of course, the rich did not always live by the articles of their faith. Moreover, the Arab investors were guided in financial affairs by the same moral distinction that once governed Christians and Jews. Riba was forbidden among members of the tribe, but it was perfectly acceptable to collect interest from foreigners.

Thus, for instance, pious citizens of Saudi Arabia would see no hypocrisy in the fact that more than $50 billion of their nation’s oil revenues was invested at one time in U.S. government securities, collecting interest from the borrower, the American taxpayer, while simultaneously the Saudi princes promoted the concept of interest-free Islamic banking at home.21

Meanwhile, Americans generally did not doubt the superiority of their own system or question its justice. After all, the arguments for repealing the legal limits on interest were based on equity too. After Congress set aside the state usury laws, investors would at last be free to recover a fair return on their wealth. In the United States, the concept of usury seemed an anachronism.

When usury became legal, of course some lenders would demand more than a fair return. In Washington, D.C., Pearl S. Merriwether was desperate for a loan. Disabled and out of work at sixty-two, she was unable to pay her gas and telephone bills and so she turned to First American Mortgage Company. First American provided her a one-year $25,000 mortgage with an effective interest rate of 142 percent. This was now legal. First American reported that over a two-year period it lent more than $2 million at interest rates ranging from 100 to 150 percent.

As state legislatures followed Congress by repealing usury limits on consumer loans, other desperate or ill-informed borrowers would pay more too. In Flagstaff, Arizona, a Navajo family named Kearns borrowed $700 from Ideasource Inc. at 127 percent interest. In Richmond, Virginia, an elderly couple, Charles and Gertrude Taylor, borrowing $5,325, was charged 39 points, or $2,100, in order to make the transaction. In South Carolina, car dealers charged up to 150 percent interest. Some of these victims, either gullible or desperate, lost their homes to the lenders—much the way French peasants lost their small plots of land to the avaricious rentier in the sixteenth century.22

These abuses and many others were lamented, but hardly to be avoided in a free marketplace. Like the other changes in public morality, legal liberation from the sin of usury meant, inevitably, that some lenders would try it.

When the financial legislation was finally enacted, the Federal Reserve had won an important victory for itself. Yet, on a deeper level, the Fed also had lost. For more than fifteen years, the Federal Reserve had staged an awkward stalling action against financial deregulation —a position that put it athwart the ambitions of its own primary constituency, the commercial banks. The 1980 legislation meant its rearguard struggle was lost. The Federal Reserve chairman, whatever he might say in public, knew the legislation would greatly complicate the most important function of the central bank—controlling the expansion of credit.

“Under interest-rate decontrol,” a former Fed official explained, “any idiot can buy money, as long as he’s willing to pay the price. So you have to push interest rates up very high across the board in order to slow down the economy. So the Fed’s control becomes blunter, more difficult.”

For a generation, the various ceilings that the government had imposed on interest rates had acted like stop valves in the plumbing of finance. When market forces (or the Fed) pushed interest rates up to the legal limits, the system would shut down. It was not that borrowers such as home buyers or contractors were necessarily unwilling to pay higher interest rates—the shutdown came from investors, who refused to provide the money when they knew their returns were artificially depressed by the government ceilings. An investor who held funds in a regulated account at a savings and loan, drawing 5 percent or so, would withdraw his money and move it to another storage place, one that was unregulated and promised a much higher return.

The results could be dramatic. When the Federal Reserve tightened the money supply and pushed up interest rates, thousands and thousands withdrew their funds and the stop valves closed. Money rushed out of financial intermediaries like savings and loan associations, at which point S & L’s were unable to make new mortgage loans. When mortgage lending stopped, the housing industry shut down. The declining sales and employment in housing would spread to other sectors, and the Federal Reserve would get the results it wanted—a subsidence of economic activity that moderated price inflation.

These episodes were known as “credit crunches,” and a series of them occurred periodically in the late 1960s and early 1970s (known as “disintermediation” to economists, because the process of financial intermediation, the flow of money from investor through lending institution to borrower, was interrupted). The effects could be brutally swift and particularly harsh for the housing industry. Each time a credit crunch developed, the Federal Reserve was denounced by home builders, S & L managers and others for inducing it. The Fed was “choking” their access to credit, they complained, and essentially they were right.

But the credit crunch had two virtues, from the Federal Reserve’s point of view. First, it worked (sometimes more severely than the Fed had intended). Second, it worked at relatively low levels of interest rates. If the Fed pushed rates up a notch or two, the flows of lending into certain sectors would begin to stop. Now that the last of the Reg Q interest-rate controls were removed, the supply of funds would continue uninterrupted, but at what price? How high would the Fed have to push interest rates in order to get the desired response from the economy?

“Before, we zapped the housing industry,” the former Fed official said. “Now we have to zap the whole economy. That makes Volcker’s life a lot more difficult.”

The standard economic models presumed that consumers, businesses and bankers would all react predictably to the negative incentives of higher interest rates. Dense mathematical formulas were devoted to describing how x interest-rate increases would produce x restraint among borrowers and buyers—the behavior-modification model of monetary policy. The trouble was, people did not modify their behavior according to the model.

Encouraged by expectations of inflation or driven by their own reckless optimism, borrowers were shattering the old assumptions about how much they would pay for money. People kept borrowing even despite the record rates—most dramatically in the early months of 1980 when the prime rate rose toward 20 percent and credit continued to expand explosively. Higher rates had bite, but not nearly as strong as the economists would have predicted. Household consumers were the most cautious, according to Albert Wojnilower’s analysis of the trend. Families were the first to pull back from borrowing at higher rates because they were risking their own well-being. Business executives, a naturally optimistic group, were less prudent than households. Financial managers, in Wojnilower’s judgment, were the most incautious of all—willing to continue lending at prices that some borrowers could not possibly pay. If enough borrowers eventually defaulted, then the generous bankers were in trouble too.

Wojnilower described the threat to monetary control: .

... no amount of deregulation and innovation can enable a financial system to escape the bear hug of a determinedly anti-inflationary monetary policy. But, if key participants in the economy believe that as a result of their ingenuity they as individuals can escape, they make it much harder for a restrictive monetary policy to succeed. They become willing to take greater risks and to bid up interest rates even higher in an effort to outlast each other and the competition. Every rise in interest rates makes it more politically difficult for the government to press home its restrictive policy. And the greater exposure taken by the private sector, the more the Fed’s hand may be stayed for fear of touching off an uncontrollable wave of bankruptcies.

The Federal Reserve could not simply let the foolhardy take their lumps, since it was also responsible for “the safety and soundness” of the financial system. If financial institutions, particularly banks, were undermined by their own carefree lending, the Fed would have to pick up the pieces. As lender of last resort, it was supposed to rescue the drowning swimmers, as Wojnilower put it. “Deregulation,” he warned, “is like removing the ropes and depth markers and buoys and putting all the responsibility for safety on the lifeguard. It is a game of chicken with the financial survival of our economy.”23

In less colorful terms, many of the senior Federal Reserve officials shared some of Wojnilower’s concern, including Paul Volcker. Their apprehension was never forcefully stated in public. Financial deregulation, after all, was an issue akin to motherhood in the financial community and all Fed officials blessed the general objective. Occasionally, however, Volcker would hint at his misgivings.

“We have devoted a lot of effort, rightly or wrongly, over the past fifteen years ... to freeing up the markets from the kind of restraint we once had,” Volcker told the House Banking Committee. “. . . We are more reliant, in a sense, on interest rates as that cost factor exerting restraint. We don’t have the available constraint that we once had and most people count that as a blessing.” Did Volcker regard it as a blessing? “Oh, by and large,” he answered. “I think that we needed some freeing up here. I get restive about it now and then because it comes out partially in interest rates higher than they otherwise would be.”24

Over the years, the deregulation question had put Volcker and his predecessors in an awkward position politically. A forthright defense of the regulatory stop valves would have been most difficult, considering that they were under attack from all sides—the disappointed borrowers, the investors and the financial intermediaries that lost their deposits. Instead, the Fed stalled. It endorsed the idea of deregulation, but urged caution in actually doing it. It held the line on the various Reg Q ceilings as long as possible, then one by one discarded them when the pressures for change became too great.

If the Fed was in the back pocket of the major banks, then why did it resist them on financial deregulation? In many ways, the Federal Reserve did resemble the political scientist’s definition of a “captive” regulatory agency—one that was beholden to the industry it regulated, anxious to serve its needs first. Yet here was an issue of great importance to the Fed’s core constituency of major banks—financial deregulation—and the central bank pulled the other way, at least as long as it dared.

The explanation was that financial deregulation directly threatened the Federal Reserve’s own power. It undermined the central bank’s ability to deliver on its most basic obligation—to control the overall expansion of credit. The Fed’s deepest institutional purpose was to serve as the economy’s governor, the wise regulator who kept things from getting out of control. Yet Volcker and other Fed officials doubted that the banking system would do this for itself. The marketplace, they feared, would not moderate the pace of new lending simply by raising the price.

Without supply controls, price was the Fed’s only lever. But if borrowers were willing to pay the going rates, however punishing, what was to stop private debt from expanding indefinitely—beyond control of the Fed, perhaps far beyond any reasonable expectation that the new loans could be paid back? Deregulation gave more freedom to the decisions in the private marketplace, but the Federal Reserve was still responsible for maintaining order. If private debt burdens became swollen and widespread failures resulted, the excesses would be attributed to the reckless lenders and borrowers who had made the unsustainable commitments. But the Federal Reserve itself would also be accused of dereliction of duty.





