6 THE ROLLER COASTER


The Federal Reserve chairman often seemed deliberately evasive in his answers, which frustrated and angered many members of Congress. Representative Frank Annunzio, a Democrat from Chicago, once offered a sarcastic compliment. “You would make a very excellent prisoner of war,” Annunzio told Volcker, “because you wouldn’t tell the enemy a thing.”1

On one question, Paul Volcker was forthright and clear—he did not think credit controls were the answer. Given the inflation-driven explosion of lending and record rates in early 1980, controls would be “beside the point” and “counterproductive,” as well as an administrative nightmare. Besides, he pointed out, consumer credit was already declining and mortgage lending already restrictive. What would be the point of imposing new controls on those sectors?

Still, the Fed chairman kept hearing the same question in the early weeks of 1980. The Consumer Price Index was at nearly 17 percent and the prime lending rate was 16 percent and still rising. With its new operating system, the Federal Reserve had been tightening the money supply for four months, but with no obvious effect on the giddy expansion of borrowing in the economy. The Fed’s warnings to the banks had not inhibited the rampaging speculation in silver and gold and other commodities. There was a gathering feeling, as Volcker himself said, that things were out of control. The question was put to him by anxious congressmen and even by some leading financiers of Wall Street: why doesn’t the government invoke its emergency powers and impose controls to brake the expansion of credit?

“The problems are absolutely horrendous,” Volcker explained to the House Banking Committee on February 19,“. . . and I would suggest to you that, after all is said and done, controls don’t really deal with the basic causes of inflation.”

Three weeks later, on March 14, the Federal Reserve Board announced a program of emergency credit controls—supply limitations that covered not only commercial banks but also the unregulated money-market mutual funds and all retail companies that issued credit cards, from Sears, Roebuck to Mobil and Exxon. The banks, whose lending had expanded by more than 17 percent in February, would be limited to 9 percent growth in new credit. Banks would be further inhibited by other provisions that effectively raised the cost of the money they themselves borrowed to fund new loans. All this was accompanied by broad guidelines to banks and other lenders on how they should allocate their loans—another admonition to avoid the froth of corporate take-overs and commodities speculation while providing credit for small businesses, farmers, homeowners and others.

Volcker’s earlier hostility to credit controls was doubtless sincere— he did dislike the idea—but the Federal Reserve chairman was not at liberty to reveal the unusual dialogue then under way between himself and the White House. The President wanted to impose controls. He kept pressing Volcker to agree. After weeks of private negotiations with the President and his advisers, the Federal Reserve chairman did not say no.

The idea of controls had first been raised in the President’s councils four months earlier, right after the Fed’s dramatic policy initiative, when Jimmy Carter heard the gloomy predictions from his economic advisers. By February, their forecasts had come true, and, belatedly, Carter tried to regain the initiative for himself. Volcker, though independent of the President’s control, was invited to participate.

In addition to the frightening inflation rate, Jimmy Carter was now threatened by additional skepticism about his economic policies. When the President sent Congress his new budget for the 1981 fiscal year, he promised it would produce a deficit of only $13 billion. The claim was derided, both in Washington and Wall Street, because the Administration simultaneously revised upward its estimate of the deficit for the current fiscal year, 1980—upward to almost $60 billion. Skeptics could not believe Carter’s new budget was genuinely austere (though, relatively speaking, it was). For the bond market, this fueled fears of even worse inflation and, as investors fled, bond prices collapsed.

Some of Carter’s advisers believed that direct controls might help the Administration thread its way to safer ground for the election season—pushing down the high interest rates and cooling off the economy without forcing it into recession. Charles Schultze, chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers, was not so optimistic. “Given everything that had happened, the oil shocks and so on, the only question, both politically and in economic terms, was how do we limit the damage,” Schultze said. “How do we minimize the damage of what’s inevitably going to be bad, either through inflation or recession.”

As Volcker talked with the White House, a trade-off emerged that embraced their different objectives. The President would draft a new budget, trimming another $13 billion from federal spending. And, at the President’s request, the Federal Reserve would impose an assortment of controls on lending. In the course of working out the details, Volcker was used as a kind of emblem of the President’s sincerity. The White House advisers included him in meeting after meeting with Cabinet officers, congressional leaders and others, discussing intimate details of which federal programs should be reduced. These were political questions that did not belong to the Federal Reserve chairman, but Volcker’s presence at the table was meant to impress the other participants.

As Charles Schultze said:

It’s absolutely implicit and not spoken, but it is unusual for the Fed chairman to be involved in these meetings with the President. You can’t play that kind of game and then go out and blast the results. Second, there was never a deal explicitly, but Volcker understood that just as Carter was doing things unpleasant for himself, cutting up his own budget, which would alienate the liberal constituencies, so he too, Volcker, would have to do some things he wasn’t quite anxious to do.

Volcker was ambivalent. He thought controls on credit cards and retail credit seemed particularly pointless since consumer borrowing was already subsiding. The President insisted that the controls cover credit cards, Volcker was told, because that was something average citizens could understand. It was intended as a unifying political message, not an economic strategy. On the other hand, Volcker figured the controls could be drafted in a way that minimized ill effects and gave him a new opportunity to stiffen the terms for the banks. “I wasn’t entirely allergic to some sort of way of telling the banks to slow down their lending, some sort of moral suasion,” Volcker said.

Back at the Federal Reserve Board, Volcker’s agreement with the President encountered considerable opposition. With the exception of the vice chairman, Fred Schultz, the other governors were unenthusiastic and three were strongly opposed.

Governor Philip Coldwell was opposed, but he was retiring and would not be around to vote against the proposal. Governor Charles Partee was also opposed, though Partee felt mildly embarrassed because, back in 1969 when he was the Fed’s research director, he had helped draft the ambiguous Credit Control Act, which empowered the Chief Executive to ask the Fed to impose controls but did not say that the Fed had to obey him.

Henry Wallich politely declined to go along. “There are always good reasons to do a bad thing, something that is convenient and expeditious and avoids the pain,” Wallich said. “In the long run, we can adhere to principle, but in the short run it is difficult and so we push the principle off further into the future and choose the less painful course.”

When the governors discussed the question, Volcker conceded that, legally, they could refuse Carter’s request. But, the chairman asked, do you really want to go against the President?

Wallich was the only one who did. “It’s not an easy thing to vote against a President’s wishes,” Wallich said. “But what are we appointed for? Why are we given these long terms in office? Presumably, it is so that not only the present but the past and the future have some weight in our decisions. In the end, it may be helpful to remind the President that it’s not only his present concerns that matter.” Wallich voted no.

The Fed’s acquiescence on this issue helped define the actual limits of its institutional independence. While in theory the Federal Reserve could ignore a President’s wishes, in fact it was reluctant to do so, at least when the conflict was so visible and well defined. Volcker might easily ignore the private kibitzing from the White House on the direction of monetary policy and he regularly did. It was much harder to say no to the President in public.

“You never want a confrontation where a President says, ‘Do this’ and we say, ‘We won’t,’” Partee explained. “Good God, that’s in extremis.”

Once Volcker had the board’s consent, he and Fed technicians began drafting the specifics of the controls—designing them to be as loose and innocuous as possible. The restrictions on consumer borrowing and credit cards, for instance, exempted practically every purchase of substance that a family might make—automobiles, furniture and appliances, home-improvement loans and mortgages. The Fed’s broad guidelines on credit allocation by banks were merely voluntary. The new reserve burdens on banks and retailers might provide modest restraint but only a marginal impact. The idea, as one draftsman said, was “to throw a little sand in the system,” but not to stop it.

When the President and the Federal Reserve chairman announced their initiatives, most of the Fed’s officials were confident they had succeeded. They joked among themselves about the many loopholes written into the controls. They were confident that lenders and borrowers would find them. A senior staff economist offered to bet Vice Chairman Schultz that the controls would have virtually no effect. “What we intended was a pretty cosmetic program,” Partee said, “and nowhere was it to be more cosmetic than in the area of consumer credit.”

On March 14, with the dramatic flourish available to the Presidency, Jimmy Carter announced to the nation that urgent measures were being invoked. “The actions I’ve outlined involve costs,” the President said. “They involve pain. But the cost of acting is far less than the cost of not acting. The temporary pain of inconvenience is far less, for all of us together, than the still worse, permanent pain of constantly rising inflation.”2

The next day, Volcker held a briefing at the Fed, outlining the complicated limits that would be imposed on lending. Treasury Secretary Miller, CEA Chairman Schultze and other Administration officials held a televised panel discussion to emphasize the seriousness of the new measures. The TV evening news repeated the announcements portentously and displayed credit cards on the television screen— VISA, MasterCard, American Express and others—to dramatize the President’s plea: stop borrowing.

For once, Americans got the message. Within days, consumer spending slowed drastically and so did the borrowing by businesses. The White House mailroom was inundated by cut-up credit cards sent by hundreds of citizens to demonstrate their support for the campaign. The President had hoped to capture the average citizen’s attention, and he succeeded far too well. If borrowing was suddenly unpatriotic, then so was buying.

The economy collapsed. The recession, long predicted by forecasters, finally began in earnest. But it was not the gradual contraction that many had expected. The loss of economic activity was swift and alarmingly steep. Within three months, the Gross National Product would shrink by 10 percent—the sharpest recession in thirty-five years. For a time, it looked like a free-fall descent.

The Federal Reserve was as surprised as anyone else. The sudden collapse disrupted all its assumptions and launched the Fed’s policy makers on a harrowing trip. Through the year, as they struggled to catch up with events, their regulation of the money supply and the economy began to resemble a ride on a roller coaster.

Fred Weimer saw Jimmy Carter’s message ripple through thousands of Sears stores across the country and concluded it was psychological. Weimer was assistant general credit manager for Sears, one of the nation’s largest dispensers of retail credit, and he was amazed by how swiftly Americans reacted to the President’s plea.

“The thrust of Carter’s message was that it was kind of unpatriotic to use credit cards,” Weimer said, “and people responded. We thought it was overkill. The figures already showed the economy turning. We didn’t know how bad the controls would be for our sales, although we knew they would be bad.”

The Sears network of stores had recorded sales on credit in February that were up 18 percent over the previous year. In March, the credit sales were down 1 percent—and down 8 percent in April and down 11 percent in May. The new reserve requirement that the Fed imposed on retailers offering consumer credit became instantly irrelevant for Sears. Sears did not have to worry about the lid placed on growth—for the next six months its credit sales were shrinking. “Our total company sales were very bad,” Weimer said. “You don’t make up those credit sales in cash.”

For J. C. Penney, the President’s announcement was “an absolute nightmare,” according to Duncan Muir, manager of public relations. Penney’s at first attempted to get in step with the government’s credit-tightening campaign by requiring a minimum payment of $200 for long-term loans on large purchases. In the garbled press coverage, it was said that Penney’s was allowing customers to use credit cards only if they made purchases of $200 or more.

“I was on the phone for days,” Muir said. “Irate customers called. Newspapers called. There was a sharp fallout in sales. We gradually got it straightened out, but it took several months for things to settle down.”

Penney’s customers not only stopped “charging.” Many of them also cut up their charge cards and mailed them into Penney stores. Other regular customers rushed in to pay off their old charge-account balances.

VISA shrank too. The national credit-card company had been expanding robustly, adding more than seven million cardholders in 1979. In a few months, it lost more than 500,000 of them. During subsequent months, VISA’s cash advances fell by more than $600 million, nearly 10 percent of its volumes. Credit-card buying declined generally as banks that issued credit cards stopped soliciting new customers. Dozens of retail companies and banks raised the terms for their customers —higher minimum payments, interest rates and other charges. Many of these added costs for borrowers would remain in place permanently, a continuing dividend collected long after the Fed’s controls were removed.3

Nothing quite like this had ever occurred before. In February, American consumers had $310 billion outstanding in installment loans, a pool of revolving debt that was growing by more than $2 billion a month. In the four months following the Fed’s controls, consumers would not only stop taking on new loans, they would also pay off more than $7.4 billion in outstanding loans. The pool was draining.

At the Fed, the harried governors were dealing with thousands of complaints and questions from bankers and retailers and, at the same time, trying to figure out exactly what they had done. The specific controls were demonstrably weak, yet their impact was overwhelming.

“We really didn’t think we had hit the mule with a two-by-four,” Fred Schultz said. “We thought we were using a light switch. The idea was not to make the economy go into the tank—it was supposed to allow the economy to grow but without the credit excesses. Instead, the consumer got it into his head that the government was telling him not to use credit. The darned economy just fell off the cliff.”

As the governors heard the dramatic stories from retailers about plummeting credit sales, many of them also concluded that the source of the sudden collapse was psychological—driven by a powerful medium that was beyond the control of central bankers, television.4

Federal Reserve officials, in any case, dismissed the episode as a fluke—a bizarre conjunction between the popular influence of television and the obscure regulatory powers of the central bank. They did not pause to consider whether the experience ought to have taught them something about how to influence the nation’s economic behavior. Afterward, many technical studies were conducted by the Fed on the financial complications created by the 1980 recession, but it made no attempt to understand the public psychology of the event.

Yet two back-to-back events posed an illuminating contrast in how the Federal Reserve communicated its objectives to the American public. On October 6, when Volcker launched his major offensive, the announcement had been couched in the obscure language of finance. Not surprisingly, very few citizens who were not financiers understood what he meant. Not grasping the significance, the general public and even sophisticated corporate executives did not change their outlook or behavior. In March, when credit controls were announced, the language was blunt and melodramatic and the message itself became the medium for dramatic results (more dramatic than anyone intended). The Federal Reserve’s new credit controls were purposely weak, even meaningless compared to the fundamental policy shift it had undertaken on October 6. But this time the government spoke clearly and ordinary citizens responded. The Federal Reserve, in other words, paid a price for the cloak of mystery it maintained around its policies. The Fed, it seemed, might have more influence on how private citizens reacted to its economic policies if it spoke to people in words they could understand.

Jimmy Carter earned an unpleasant distinction. “For the first time in history,” as Henry Reuss complained, “a Democratic President put the economy in recession.” And in an election year, barely eight months before the voters would decide whether Carter deserved a second term.

In the classic manner of business cycles, the downturn fed on itself. When the demand for goods falls off, the producers find their backlog of unsold products growing and so they cut back on production. The laid-off workers lose income and the lost income further reduces the demand for goods and leads to still more unemployment. The only difference this time was the speed of the contraction. In the second quarter of 1980, the Gross National Product shrank by $39 billion dollars in real terms, adjusted for inflation. For the past four years, real GNP had grown $60 to $70 billion a year. Industrial production decreased by more than 8 percent. Unemployment rose from 6.3 percent in March to 7.8 percent by July, an additional 1.6 million people who were out of work. Real disposable income per capita—the best measure of what average citizens are earning after inflation and taxes —grew weakly in 1979, but by the spring of 1980, it was shrinking. Real per capita income fell from $4,503 to $4,435 in the 1980 recession —wiping out the gains of the previous year. In a nation where everyone came to expect steady progress in his or her economic status, the average worker was, in effect, pushed back to 1978.

Jimmy Carter, naturally, suffered most in public esteem. The President was winning his struggle against Senator Edward M. Kennedy for the Democratic nomination, but as the recession took hold, he began losing primaries in large industrial states, the heart of electoral power for the Democratic Party. Carter’s second effort to produce an austere budget that would reassure financial markets about inflation was turned into another argument against him—more evidence of his inconstancy as a leader. When Federal Reserve officials moved quickly to start rescinding the main elements of the credit-control program, Carter’s White House advisers did not object.

The Fed, in less obvious ways, was also under attack. The thousands of small independent home builders across the country held Volcker and the governors personally responsible for wrecking them with high interest rates. Starts of new housing construction averaged

1.7 million units for 1979, well below the industry’s potential, but 1980 was much worse. In May, housing starts fell to an annual rate of 940,000. From December to April, the monthly bankruptcies of businesses rose from 2,394 to 3,756 and many of the failed firms were home builders.

Hundreds of the contractors staged an informal protest—they put postage stamps on blocks of two-by-fours and bricks and mailed them to the officers of the Federal Reserve. The lumber and bricks were supposed to remind the Fed of all the new homes that would not be built because of its monetary policy.5 Like other public officials, the Federal Reserve governors were accustomed to nasty mail, but now the letters became more numerous and abusive, including threats of personal harm aimed at the chairman.

A television interviewer, Jim Lehrer, put the question bluntly to Volcker: “Are you willing to accept parenthood for this recession?”

“No, I’ll claim no paternity,” the chairman replied. “I don’t even like the question being asked that way. You know, if it has a father, any single father, and it never does, I suspect inflation and the distortions that arise from inflation are the father.”6

Still, that begged the question: what made the bubble finally burst? Was it the Federal Reserve’s October tightening, gradually forcing a recession with the record-high interest rates and scarce credit? Or was it the economic trauma created by the credit-controls program? Perhaps it was both.

“You could argue, of course, that the credit controls weren’t needed at all,” said Henry Wallich, who had opposed them. “The economy was already slowing down. Just give it time. Why should we do this overkill?”

That argument looked more persuasive in hindsight than it did at the moment the controls were introduced. Subsequent accounting by the National Bureau of Economic Research, which tracked business cycles precisely, concluded that the economy’s growth actually peaked in January and economic activity began to subside gradually two months before the credit controls were announced. Thus, the sudden shock effect of the credit controls most likely converted a gradual contraction into a sharp and deep decline.

The residual political memory was quite different, however. The Fed’s credit controls, it was widely assumed, were an unworkable disaster and Jimmy Carter was to blame. The reality was that, if anything, the credit controls had worked too well.

While the economy was rapidly deteriorating, Paul Volcker faced an ancillary crisis—the collapse of the silver bubble. Speculators led by the Hunt brothers of Texas had driven the price to a peak above $52 an ounce in January. When the bubble burst and prices started subsiding rapidly, the speculators were in trouble and so were the banks and brokerages that had financed their silver buying. As the value of silver declined, the lenders had to demand more cash or collateral from the Hunts to support the loans. If silver fell far enough, not even the billionaire family from Dallas could come up with the ante in time. In the extreme, the loans would be defaulted and the lenders would be left holding a lot of silver that wasn’t worth much in a collapsing market.

The moment of crisis came on March 27, remembered in commodity markets as “silver Thursday.” A top executive of Bache Halsey, second-largest brokerage in the nation, had phoned Volcker the day before and warned that if the price collapsed further, Bache would not survive. It had lent more than $200 million to the Hunts, and the value of the silver collateral it was holding was shrinking everyday. On silver Thursday, silver fell in value by one-third—from $15.80 to $10.80 an ounce. Volcker and other federal bank regulators began a series of hurried catch-up meetings to determine the extent of the Hunts’ borrowing and how seriously the financial system was threatened. Some of the regulators feared they might be on the brink of a historic panic, not unlike the crash of stock-market speculation that launched the Great Depression in 1929.

The initial rumors and misinformation made the banks’ exposure sound even larger than it was, but it was still substantial. All told, twelve U.S. banks, the American branches of four foreign banks and five brokerage houses had provided the Hunts’ silver-buying venture with more than $800 million in loans—equivalent to almost 10 percent of all the bank lending in the country during the previous two months.

The Federal Reserve’s admonitions against speculative lending had been ignored, nor had it used its regulatory powers to actually stop the silver lending. But Volcker did not dwell on that point now. The new question was whether a further slide in silver prices would bring down any major banks. First National of Chicago, ninth-largest in the country, was most vulnerable, having lent the Hunts a total of $175 million either directly or indirectly. If silver prices fell to as low as $7 an ounce, the value of the collateral held by the banks would be worth less than the loans they had made.

On Friday, the silver markets paused in the descent and the price stabilized long enough to allow Bache and some others to sell off silver collateral without absorbing fatal losses. Then a new crisis developed: to augment their price speculation, the Hunts had bought futures contracts for silver totaling 19 million ounces from Engelhard, the giant international minerals firm. Futures were normally used as a hedge against sudden price changes, an agreement to pay a certain price six or nine months later when the commodities were delivered. But futures could also be a high-risk gamble—betting that the price would be higher in the future. The Hunts lost their bet. Delivery was due on Monday, March 31, and Engelhard was demanding cash for its silver—$665 million.

If the Hunts defaulted on Monday, the price of silver would fall drastically again and the entire accumulation of speculative bank loans would doubtless crash with it. While $800 million was a lot of money, the dozen major banks and the foreign ones were large enough to survive a loss of that magnitude. What the regulators most feared was the aftershock—the possibility that such a spectacular one-day debacle would set off a general panic among investors, pulling their huge deposits out of the exposed banks like First Chicago and threatening their liquidity.

In that event, the Federal Reserve had the power, of course, to bail out the threatened bank or banks with unlimited advances from the Discount window—in effect, replacing the lost deposits with government loans until confidence in the banks was restored. That remedy would have been politically awkward, given what was happening to the rest of the American economy. And the Federal Reserve chairman did not wish to find out what would happen if he stood aside and let the banks take their losses.

Instead, Volcker gave his blessing to another solution. That weekend, quite by coincidence, the Association of Reserve City Bankers was gathering in Boca Raton, Florida, bringing together the leaders of all the vulnerable banks and others who might help out. Volcker attended too. On Sunday evening, the bankers held an all-night bargaining session with the Hunts and Engelhard representatives. The negotiations led ultimately to the terms for a private bailout—a new loan of $1.1 billion from thirteen banks which would extinguish the Hunts’ old debts, give them the means to settle with Engelhard and stretch out their obligations over ten years.

Paul Volcker was down the hall in another hotel room and the bankers kept him informed hour by hour of their progress. In the end, with certain provisos, he blessed the transaction—a crucial assurance for the banks. If Volcker had not consented, the major banks would have found it difficult to participate, perhaps impossible. After all, the Fed had just imposed new credit controls on the nation and the new loan package for the Hunts directly violated at least the spirit of that program, in effect, rolling over loans that were made purely for speculation. Technically, the Fed did not bail out the Hunt brothers and the banks. No government money was at stake. But, practically speaking, Volcker saved them by granting a huge exception to the rules he had just imposed on the American economy.7

Although Governor Henry Wallich was not happy with Volcker’s handling of the situation, he did not challenge the chairman’s decisions as the crisis manager. “Suppose a large firm had gone bust,” Wallich said. “It wouldn’t have been the end of the world. It would have been a great tragedy, but it would have been a disaster on a smaller scale. The argument against doing anything was: let the bankers and the brokers take their lumps.”

Philip Coldwell, who had just retired from the board, resented the bailout. “I was very unhappy with the chairman that he let Bunker Hunt off the hook,” Coldwell said. “Hunt clearly was trying to corner silver, and I thought he should pay the price. In my very simplistic way of looking at it, I didn’t see anything wrong with the banks’ paying the price too.”

As details of the silver bailout became public, Volcker was grilled again and again at hostile congressional inquiries, led most effectively by Representative Benjamin Rosenthal, chairman of a subcommittee on government operations. Why had the Fed been so blind to what was going on? And why had it rushed to the rescue? Volcker provided explanations and endured many harangues, but the congressional anger produced a misleading public impression. The critics were tenacious and sincere, but Volcker well understood that these attacks were less meaningful than the heavy press coverage made them seem. Senators and representatives with much more influence privately supported him. Indeed, the congressional delegations from Texas and Illinois had pleaded with Volcker to save their troubled banks. Volcker was not defying Congress, as it appeared, but cooperating with the private wishes of its leading members.8

This illusion was often the case in the relationship between Congress and the Federal Reserve: the public heard the angry critics and perhaps assumed that the Federal Reserve was seriously threatened. The Fed willingly took the heat, confident in the knowledge that private, unspoken support from Congress would ultimately protect it. Well-publicized congressional attacks on the Federal Reserve often had the quality of a charade.

In the silver crisis, Volcker made a distinction common to central bankers but offensive to many outside the financial world. His perspective expressed the Federal Reserve’s central purpose: rescuing a major financial institution was in the public interest, but government bailouts for other kinds of private enterprises were wrong. A major banking failure could set off a wave of larger and unpredictable consequences, other bank failures and perhaps a genuine panic that would destabilize the financial system. But the bankruptcy of a major manufacturer or retailer was a limited event, a natural consequence of free-market forces. People would lose money, workers would be out of jobs, but the system would adjust dynamically and create new enterprises, new jobs. If government came to the rescue of every failing business, where would it end?9

Given his financier’s perspectives, Volcker would see no contradiction in the fact that he promoted a rescue for the major banks that had ignored his directive (and, ultimately, for their customers, the Hunt brothers) while he simultaneously opposed a government bailout for the Chrysler Corporation. The central bank followed a selective definition of free enterprise: economic stability required that banks and other large financial firms must be saved from their own folly. But when other kinds of businesses failed, that was considered a normal, healthy feature of free-enterprise capitalism.

The Federal Reserve, in fact, had the power to lend directly to nonbanking corporations that were in trouble, but it had always refused to do so. Though it was not widely known, the Fed had already turned down Chrysler before the auto company went to Congress for help. Since 1935, the law had given the Federal Reserve extraordinary authority to make special loans to any individual or institution, public or private, in distress. The law required only “unusual and exigent circumstances.” Except for a few instances during the Depression, the Fed always said no to such financially desperate parties, rejecting pleas from Midwestern grain farmers, Lockheed Corporation and the City of New York, among others. As lender of last resort, the Fed would stretch quite far to avert failure in financial markets, but it couldn’t do the same for anyone in the productive economy.

Simultaneously, the Federal Reserve was acquiescing to risky behavior in another sector of bank lending—one many times larger and more threatening than the speculative loans in silver. Over a period of years, the leading U.S. banks had been committing tens of billions in new loans to the less-developed nations of the world, particularly Latin America. The biggest names in American banking were becoming overexposed. Yet the Federal Reserve did not compel these banks to pull back or even to moderate their loan commitments. From time to time, the Fed did issue mild warnings, usually in private. Most bankers brushed them aside.

At one private session with executives of money-center banks, Paul Volcker expressed his own worries about the expanding foreign loans and urged the bankers to show more caution. “Walt Wriston was first to react,” Vice Chairman Schultz recalled. “In essence, Wriston said: ‘Mr. Chairman, I disagree with you. These international loans are the best loans I’ve got. I’ve had few defaults on them and my profit margin is very good.’ Paul said: ‘That’s true for the past. I’m worried about the future.’”

Central bankers did worry a lot. But the Federal Reserve did very little else, in an effective and timely fashion, to force the banks to behave more prudently. The bankers’ optimism and the Fed’s lenient attitude were, little by little, setting the stage for world financial crisis.

In April, as commercial banks made their weekly reports to the Federal Reserve, the governors watched the incoming numbers with some amazement. For months, they had struggled with mixed success to slow down the runaway growth of the money supply. Now money was disappearing.

Week by week, as each commercial bank reported its currency and demand deposits, Fed economists calculated the total for the entire system. That figure was the basic measure of the American money supply—the aggregate known as M-l. Instead of growing, M-l was abruptly getting smaller.

Money was vanishing—and at a very rapid rate. In mid-March, there was $393 billion in M-l. By the last week of May, there was only $376 billion. This did not require any shredding of $100 bills or melting down of coins; most of the money supply, after all, did not exist as cash in people’s pockets. Most of the nation’s money existed merely as numbers in the account books at banks—the total balances of checking accounts. In a practical sense, more than $17 billion of America’s money ceased to exist.

The Federal Reserve had not intended anything like this. Back in February, the twelve voting members of the Federal Open Market Committee had been distressed that, after some months of moderate growth, the money supply was again expanding at the alarming rate of nearly 13 percent. They agreed they must impose more restraint—by providing less generous quantities of reserves to the banking system —and the FOMC set a growth target of 4 to 6.5 percent for M-l. Instead, M-l was flat in March—no growth at all. By April, as the Federal Reserve watched helplessly, the money supply was shrinking at an annualized rate of 17 percent.10

The tumultuous turn of events created a policy crisis for the central bank that would haunt the governors for many years. It also put the American economy through a harrowing series of ups and downs. How much should the FOMC increase the supply of reserves to compensate for the abrupt decline in money? If it did not do enough, it was possible to imagine the real economy contracting further and further in a dangerous spiral. If the Fed overdid it, the banking system could suddenly be awash with more money than the economy needed. The oversupply would drive down interest rates rapidly and perhaps restimulate the economy—like a jump start for a stalled car. All these questions would be argued among the governors and Reserve Bank presidents. Volck-er’s new monetarist system for control, adopted six months earlier, encountered its first severe test.

But what made the money disappear? Despite popular cliches, the money supply, in fact, was “controlled” by many forces, simultaneously. And no single agent controlled it absolutely, including the Federal Reserve. To appreciate this essential point, one could visualize the money supply as the water in a reservoir, the metaphor suggested by John Maynard Keynes in A Treatise on Money. The central bank’s function, Keynes explained, was to maintain the supply in the reservoir “at any required level by pouring enough water into it.” Yet, as anyone could grasp, there were obviously other factors that could change the level of the reservoir “besides how much water is poured in—for example, the natural rainfall, evaporation, leakage and the habits of the users of the system.”11

The Federal Reserve, in the same sense, was constantly adjusting the flow through its own valves—pumping or draining—in order to offset the competing influences that were also raising or lowering the water level. This was the daily essence of Fed operations—trying to keep the reservoir as close as possible to the level that the Federal Open Market Committee had decided was desirable for the economy. It was an imperfect science, surrounded by random complications, and constantly correcting itself for past mistakes or new fluctuations. In this contest, a “miss” of a billion dollars or so was close enough to be celebrated as a bull’s-eye.

The money that ceased to exist was, in fact, destroyed by everyone —humble consumers, small businesses, banks and major corporations, the vast variety of economic players, millions of them. People paid off their debts—that was one fundamental cause. When the recession began in earnest, compounded by the public’s shock reaction to credit controls, millions of consumers not only stopped their new borrowing, but they also rushed to pay off old bank loans or charge accounts. This process extinguished money because it reversed the magical way in which bank lending created money in the first place. When a customer paid off his bank loan, the bank erased the numbers on both sides of its ledger—the loan disappeared and so did the demand deposit from which the customer had drawn the money.

In normal circumstances, of course, millions of borrowers paid off old loans every week, theoretically destroying money, but the banking system was also constantly replacing them with new loan customers —and new money. When the real economy was expanding, both consumers and producers needed additional credit as well as additional money for the expanded universe of transactions. Credit and the money supply grew steadily together. From week to week, the money totals ebbed and flowed in unremarkable degrees. One week, the Fed might report that the money supply declined by $1.5 billion. The following week, M-l might grow by $2.7 billion. But these fluctuations averaged out over time and normally in a steady, upward direction.

In April, the normal relationship between credit and money was dramatically disrupted. Millions of citizens and businesses paid off their old debts, but the banks could not find enough new borrowers to replace them. With the economy sliding swiftly into recession, neither consumers nor commercial enterprises needed additional loans, at least not enough to make up for the ones being retired. Each week, then, the banking system erased billions of dollars in credit from its “assets”—and also erased the same amounts from its “liabilities,” the demand deposits. The banking system’s “liabilities,” when added to outstanding currency, make up the basic component of the money supply known as M-l. So it was shrinking too.

“The money supply,” as Fred Schultz put it, “dropped like a stone.”

Private citizens and private businesses were shrinking M-l in another way as well—simply by moving their money. If a small business, for instance, decided to reduce the daily cash it held in an interest-free checking account and move the funds to a time or savings account that paid interest, the shift would subtract from M-l and add to one of the broader monetary aggregates, M-2, which included these less-liquid accounts. This did not “destroy” money in the fundamental sense, but it did shrink the M-l pool, the money available for immediate spending and the Federal Reserve’s principal measure of the money supply. If money was fleeing from M-l, that created a serious quandary for the Fed policy makers, who were trying to keep the money supply on a steady path. The assumed relationship between M-1 and economic activity was rendered temporarily inoperative.

In April, over the span of a few weeks, millions of bank customers apparently made the same decision—to get out of money and park their financial assets somewhere else. The driving force was the extraordinary peak in short-term interest rates—making it much more costly for someone to let his money sit idle in an interest-free checking account. The Federal Funds rate, for instance, exceeded 19 percent.

The three-month T-bill, another good measure of short-term returns, peaked above 15 percent. Millions of people moved their checking deposits to where they could capitalize on the opportunity.

Monetary economists disagreed among themselves about which of these two causes—the rapid retirement of debt or the massive shift out of checking accounts—was primarily responsible for the collapse of M-l. Like many arguments in economics, it was not a question that noneconomists needed to resolve in an either-or fashion. Either way, the money collapse was an instance where private economic behavior really was adapting to incentives created by the Federal Reserve, but the behavior modification was not working at all as the Fed policy makers had intended. Instead, it created a new question for them: if M-l was abnormally low, how could they confidently know what the right level would be?

In Keynes’s reservoir, the waters were always roiled and choppy, giving off confusing signals. Sometimes, the water level heaved and tossed so violently that not even the reservoir keepers were sure what was happening.

In theory, the Fed policy makers knew exactly what to do. The answers were provided by the new monetarist operating system the Federal Open Market Committee had adopted on October 6—providing “automatic stabilization” for the money supply by tracking the money aggregates instead of interest rates. If M-l growth exceeded the target range they had set for it, that meant they must tighten up on the reserves the Fed supplied to the banking system and bring M-l back down. If the money supply was below its target range, then the Federal Open Market Committee would pump up bank reserves and stimulate money growth. In theory, the approach was continuously self-correcting.

In practice, Volcker and the Federal Open Market Committee were about to commit a grave error—one that would undermine all they were trying to accomplish on price inflation and also destabilize the American economy. When they gathered for their regular meeting on April 22, the operating system called for a swift reversal of the hydraulics—start pumping in more reserves until the shrinking money aggregates revived and stabilized. The worriers on the FOMC were not convinced it would work so smoothly.

Their concern boiled down to this: how far, how fast should they let interest rates fall? The Federal Funds rate had already dropped a full percentage point in the previous two weeks, though it was still very high by normal standards, about 18 percent. If the Fed followed its automatic operating system too rigidly, it might drive rates down too swiftly—and send the wrong message to everyone, both financial markets and the real economy.

Several committee members expressed their fears in the FOMC minutes: “ ... if a large decline in interest rates were to occur over the next few weeks, it was likely to be perceived by some market participants ... as an easing of monetary policy and could have very undesirable repercussions on inflationary psychology and on the dollar in foreign-exchange markets.”

In other words, if the Fed let interest rates fall too precipitously, the skeptics of Wall Street might well conclude the central bank was throwing in the towel in its avowed struggle against inflation—and, instead, trying to rescue the economy from recession during the presidential election season. The chairman, supported by a comfortable majority, wanted to take that chance. If the Fed was too stringent, it faced an opposite risk—making the sharp contraction even worse than it appeared.

Among those arguing against Volcker’s position was a new member of the Federal Open Market Committee and one who on most issues would be the chairman’s natural ally and collaborator. He was Anthony Solomon, the newly installed president of the New York Federal Reserve Bank. Having lately left a sub-Cabinet post in the Carter Administration, a self-made millionaire of liberal disposition, Solomon might have been expected to take the side for easing credit rapidly. The gathering recession, after all, directly threatened his President’s re-election. Solomon, instead, had been shaken by his experience in the Carter government. He felt strongly that only the Federal Reserve could restore order and stability to the economy.

“I’ve changed over the years,” Solomon said. “I have the same liberal social values I grew up with, but I realized over the years that some of my bleeding-heart, knee-jerk policies in the economic area were shortsighted and not good for the country. I realized that we need a sense of discipline.”

Tony Solomon’s background was different from the others. The son of Lithuanian Jewish immigrants, he grew up in Arlington, New Jersey, where his father for a time was a successful real-estate developer. “He went broke in the Depression,” Solomon remembered. “He and my mother worked ten years to pay off all their debts on mortgages. In those days, a developer signed personally for them. He lost all his properties, then eventually wound up with some small business ventures, two restaurants and a cocktail lounge.”

His humble origins were striking because anyone who met Solomon might easily have assumed he was the product of a privileged background. He was more urbane in manner than the financial economists or bankers he worked with and more catholic in his intellectual interests. His delicate goatee, going gray, and the melancholy in his eyes made him appear contemplative, like a bookish scholar who had wandered into the high-powered world of finance. Solomon and his wife collected rare art from around the world, and he was himself a serious sculptor. As a bright young student on scholarship, Solomon studied economics at the University of Chicago and Harvard, then, after the war, started a business in dehydrated foods in Mexico. Ten years later, making lots of money but bored, Solomon sold the enterprise to General Foods and began an in-and-out career in government, serving Democratic Administrations in important posts in the State Department and Treasury.

“The change in me came during the Carter Administration,” Solomon said, “as I saw the incredible amateurism of a liberally inclined economic policy and the wishful thinking that inflation wouldn’t keep going up, the silliness of stimulating the economy when unemployment was already falling, the refusal to tighten monetary policy when inflation was the danger. There was an enormous amount of amateurish, wishful thinking on the liberal side.”

Solomon and Volcker were like-minded and had worked closely on various issues for years, but at his very first meeting the New York Fed president disagreed with the Federal Reserve chairman’s analysis.

I was dismayed by the potential volatility [Solomon said]. Because we were too tied to M-l, we had to increase reserves rapidly. I thought it was ridiculous to follow the aggregates that slavishly—to let the Federal Funds rate fall drastically was absurd. However, Volcker’s position was in the majority. He is always able to command a majority. He has to compromise sometimes, but he basically prevails. Volcker admitted that there was a risk. Nobody can be 100 percent sure. If it were black and white, our job would be easy. He recognized the danger, but he still felt the balance of consideration^ meant easing.

An aide at the New York Fed said Solomon kept pressing Volcker for more flexibility on the operating system and thought he had convinced him, but when they got into the meetings, Volcker was reluctant to abandon the new rules. “Volcker was the one who was going to have to do the explaining when we were attacked for abandoning our policy,” the aide said.

Two arguments compelled the majority toward Volcker’s position. First, if the Fed did not conscientiously follow the signals of its own new operating method, that would swiftly become apparent to the discerning Fed watchers on Wall Street. The word would soon go forth that, once again, the Federal Reserve had backed away from its promises. The financial markets had experienced ten years of rising disappointment with the Fed’s inconstancy; another sudden lurch in policy would further undermine the central bank’s damaged credibility.

The second argument was the recession and its unknown dimensions. For at least three quarters, the Federal Reserve Board’s economics staff had been forecasting a moderate contraction and it hadn’t occurred. Now that recession was finally here, it didn’t look mild at all. Sales and production were falling off so sharply that the staff economists adjusted their outlook. The recession, they now thought, would be larger and longer than anticipated.

“A continued shortfall in monetary growth and persistence of relatively high interest rates could exacerbate recessionary forces in the economy,” the committee majority warned in the FOMC minutes. It was one thing for the Federal Reserve to do its duty in an election season and encourage the economy to contract. It would be quite another thing to make the recession worse than it had to be.

“That was a big factor in the decision,” Solomon said. “Obviously any Administration in an election year is worried about recession, but I wasn’t aware of any communications from the White House.”

When the debate ended and the roll was called, the only dissenting vote was cast by Henry Wallich. The Federal Open Market Committee agreed to a policy directive that would allow aggressive injections of new reserves and declining interest rates. For months, the FOMC had set a very loose range for the Federal Funds rate—allowing it to fluctuate by as much as seven percentage points—but the wide range did not matter because the rate was always bumping against the upper limit. Now the committee adjusted the range downward slightly but kept it loose. Depending on market conditions, the Fed Funds rate would be allowed to swing up or down between 13 and 19 percent.

Wallich feared that the rate might plummet from the top of the range to the bottom rather swiftly, pulling other short-term interest rates down with it and restimulating the economy before the inflationary influences were extinguished. “I favored considerably less decline in interest rates,” he explained. “I wanted to follow the operating method more rigorously on the upside than on the downside. I saw no virtue in driving interest rates into the ground and then have a resurgence later that would force us to tighten again.”

As the most ardent hawk, Wallich was used to making contrary arguments and used to losing. Other committee members regarded him fondly, but also with faint derision. “Henry” was the old-fashioned gentleman among them, unfailingly polite and principled, but also stuck like a broken record—predictably repeating himself regardless of circumstances. Throughout 1980, Henry Wallich would cast dissenting votes nine times—almost every time the Federal Open Market Committee held a meeting. He always voted for tighter money.

It’s not a pleasant thing to have to keep dissenting [he said in a sorrowful tone]. It makes one quite useless to dissent so often. Your effect on the others is obviously not through your vote itself, because you lost. Your effect may be because of what you said at the meeting, by persuading others to come along and form a new majority. One dissents less often than you think you should. After all, you’re a member of a group and you want to get along with the other members. To be a constant dissenter is a fruitless thing.

Two weeks later, on May 6, Paul Volcker hurriedly convened the voting members of the Federal Open Market Committee for a special meeting by telephone conference call. The money collapse was now in full progress, and the Fed’s Open Market Desk in New York was furiously trying to brake it—pumping in more bank reserves by buying government securities and creating new money to offset what was disappearing. With shrinking demand and expanding supply, interest rates “fell like a stone too,” as Volcker said. The Federal Funds rate dropped by more than five percentage points in a two-week span, from around 18 percent to below 13 percent. On the morning of May 6, the Fed Funds rate was trading below the bottom limit that the Federal Open Market Committee had just set for it on April 22. The Fed was in danger of losing control.

The Open Market Desk in New York needed new instructions from the FOMC. Peter Sternlight said his desk operators could follow the reserve strategy dictated by the declining money supply and keep injecting more reserves, or they could follow the target range set for the Federal Funds rate, tightening up the supply of bank reserves enough to get the rate back up to 13 percent. They could not do both. The new operating system—following the ups and downs of M-l—was in head-on collision with the Federal Reserve’s old disposition to manage the level of interest rates.

Under the circumstances, the chairman proposed that they follow the signals from the monetary aggregate and let interest rates fall further. This would require a telephone vote from the ten FOMC members who were on the line, authorizing a lower range for the Federal Funds rate. The Open Market Desk would be instructed to let the interest rate fall as low as 10.5 percent.

Volcker prevailed, but he encountered more resistance on this vote, 7 to 3. Wallich dissented again, arguing that the Federal Funds rate should be kept at 13 percent and allowed to go down no further. Tony Solomon and Roger Guffey, president of the Kansas City Federal Reserve Bank, were willing to allow some decline, but not as drastic as Volcker proposed.

“Everyone else wanted to ease,” Solomon said. “The bank presidents formed a little monetarist clique and they believed in following the monetarist aggregates. Then there are people like Teeters and Partee who were not monetarists but were worried about the recession. They wanted stimulus for the economy.”

The rate of inflation was subsiding but still in double digits. If interest rates fell too far, below 10 percent, there was the danger of recreating the condition of negative real interest rates that had existed in 1979—investors losing more value due to inflation than they gained from interest. Negative interest rates created a potent incentive for people to start borrowing heavily again. Going into debt would once again become a cheap hedge against inflation.

None of the policy makers could be certain how fast the public might react, but Volcker and the majority believed the response to lower rates would lag many months behind the decline. If, however, the public reacted quickly, the Fed could moderate any upsurge in borrowing by tightening again. Tony Solomon was not so sanguine:

My concern was that we didn’t know the lags and, therefore,.we faced the danger of a real roller coaster. You go too high with interest rates and suddenly it’s moving the other way and you are going down. Then it switches on you again and it’s suddenly going back up. I kept pushing for decreasing the automaticity of the aggregate targeting. No theory is going to help you decide how much is too much. On the downside, you are pushing into negative interest rates. On the upside, it was hard to judge what was too much.

In Henry Wallich’s thinking, the dizzying volatility was the “pact with the devil” he had warned against—the very consequences he predicted when Paul Volcker first proposed the monetarist system the previous autumn. In theoretical terms, Wallich felt vindicated. The policy dilemma was an inevitable outcome of trying to target the fluctuations of reserves precisely while ignoring the impact on interest rates. In his judgment, this was a fundamental flaw in monetarism that its many advocates ignored or denied. As he explained:

There are only two things we can peg, interest rates or reserves. I’ve always believed that whichever of the two things you don’t peg will move around rather drastically. If you peg reserves, interest rates will move more drastically. If you peg interest rates, then the money supply will move more. I never believed what the monetarists believe—that if you stabilize the money supply, you stabilize interest rates. If you stabilize one, you will probably destabilize the other. The supply can be held stable, but the demand always varies—so interest rates are very volatile.12

Anyone who has ever flown a kite on a windy day might grasp imaginatively the relationship of supply and demand and price that Wallich was describing. In a high wind, the kite will bounce around the sky erratically as long as the string is held taut. Yet if one lets out lots of slack on the string, the kite will stabilize and remain stationary even though the winds continue. Something similar was happening with the money supply and interest rates. If the Fed tried to hold the string taut on its money supply, interest rates gyrated like a kite— blown back and forth by the varying winds of demand. It is a simple law of algebra: if an equation has three variables and you hold one of them constant, the other two will fluctuate in direct response to each other.

Monetarists would probably reject the kite metaphor. The variability of demand, they would say, is the same old excuse the Fed has always trotted out when it lost control. Besides, the monetarist critics complained, the Federal Reserve had still not succeeded in its stated objective—producing a stable, steady growth rate for the money supply. M-l was bouncing around like a kite too.

With concurrence from the White House, the Fed began in mid-May to dismantle, one by one, the credit-control rules it had imposed only two months before. By July, the last of the provisions would be lifted, but, meanwhile, the “free fall” in economic activity, money supply and interest rates continued and without any clear evidence that the Fed’s countermeasures were having much impact.

The Fed kept pumping furiously. During April, the Open Market Desk at the New York Fed had added reserves at an annual rate of 14 percent. In May, still waiting anxiously for some response from the economy, the Federal Reserve pumped in reserves at a truly stunning pace—an annualized increase of 48 percent in what was called non-borrowed reserves. The May open-market operations added an extraordinary $5.4 billion to the government securities held in the Fed’s portfolio. One Reserve Bank president complained:

Volcker panicked. He was completely wrong. He was easing too far too fast. When it got down to negative interest rates, I said that’s too goddamned far. The inflation rate was about 10 percent and the Federal Funds rate fell to 8 percent. He was panicked by the swings in the economy, the sudden collapse touched off by credit controls. It was the stupidest thing to do, but we did it.

By the May 20 meeting, Volcker agreed he must compromise a bit on the automatic prescriptions of his monetarist system. But now he drew dissent from the other side—two FOMC members who complained that by restraining the decline in interest rates even modestly, the committee was not faithfully following the operating system it had adopted. The dissenters made an odd couple, because they were coming from opposite ends of the ideological spectrum represented on the Federal Open Market Committee. Governor Chuck Partee was an old Keynesian liberal worried about the rising unemployment of the recession. Larry Roos, president of the St. Louis Fed, was the monetarist stalwart who always defended the pure monetarist approach against the pragmatic compromises. Both of them argued that the Federal Funds rate should be allowed to fall as far as the market forces dictated.

I’ve always been most concerned that we should avoid making the Big Mistake [Partee said]. There is always going to be a lot of fussing around the edges about what the right policy should be, and that will affect the economy—maybe. But when you make the Big Mistake, then the books are written about what the Federal Reserve did to the economy. The big mistakes usually occur when you hold to a policy too long—you tighten and stay tight in order to fight inflation and you are reluctant to let interest rates come down until inflation has gone away. What most bothers me is that we may have a bias on the high side.

So Partee argued that if the Fed was going to follow the money aggregates to tighten credit and raise interest rates, then it should stick to the same rule when interest rates were falling, even if that meant rates that were temporarily negative.

66What Partee was saying spoke very directly to Volcker’s concern about what this might do to the Fed’s credibility,” a committee aide said. “Partee argued that it was too easy to say, ‘Okay, we tried it, now let’s go back to the old system—judgment calls.’”

Larry Roos, who had been so pleased when Volcker’s monetarist system was adopted in October, was now increasingly skeptical about the sincerity of his colleagues on the FOMC. “I believe there should be a consistent path of money growth,” he said. “When money was growing too quickly, I dissented. When it was growing too slowly, I dissented for consistency’s sake.”

Roos was so consistent, in fact, that other committee members found his repetitious monetarist speeches faintly amusing. A senior staff official said:

Roos’s approach was to regard the October 1979 technique as the victory of the monetarists. He would say: “Now we have finally seen the light and it’s my role to point out to you that what you’re dong here today is a violation of that policy. You can’t do that. You told people you were going to follow the money supply and I’m here to make sure you do it.”

After a while, others snickered.

What a game little guy Roos is [the senior staff official said]. Volcker was always polite with him, but the others were hooting at him. He would go in there, every meeting, with the monetarist line prepared for him by Anatole Balbach [research director at the St. Louis Fed], and he would put his head down and recite it. It got to the point later where the committee members would literally laugh at him. Never Volcker, but the others laughed in his face. Larry would smile and plow on.

Several of the other Reserve Bank presidents shared Roos’s monetarist perspective, but they were less aggressive in pushing it. Roos attributed this to the lopsided power relationship between the Board of Governors and the twelve Reserve Banks. The chairman and governors in Washington had final approval over the individual operating budgets of the Reserve Banks. They also could veto salary increases that the local directors proposed for their officers, including the presidents. As any bureaucrat or congressman would understand, the control of any institution’s pay scale and its budget is powerful leverage.

“These are very real influences on how vociferous a Reserve Bank president is going to be about dissenting,” Roos said. “It’s subtle, but it’s real. If one is a young, career-oriented president who’s got a family to feed, he tends to be more moderate in his opposition to the governors than an older person like myself who’s more independent.”

The roller coaster was still in descent. By the first week of June, the Federal Funds rate had again fallen below the Discount rate and hit 8.5 percent—the bottom of the Fed’s prescribed target range for it. For one trading day, it dipped as low as 7.5 percent and, for a time, the Federal Reserve lost control—the short-term interest rate that monetary policy regulates most securely was floating on its own. Discount borrowing by the banks fell to a very low level, and the money market was for a time rudderless in determining the rate for Fed Fund borrowing. Wallich explained: “When the Federal Funds rate fell below the Discount rate, there is no clear definition of where the Federal Funds rate should be because it’s no longer supported by the Discount rate. On a given day, it could fall to zero. So if you don’t lower the Discount rate, you get quite an unstable situation.”

In larger terms, the financial markets had never witnessed anything so stark and sudden, so dizzying. In early April, the Federal Funds rate hit a peak close to 20 percent. Ten weeks later, it had fallen to 8.5 percent. Commercial paper, certificates of deposit, three-month Treasury bills—all of the many instruments of short-term borrowing followed the same steep plunge, falling by as much or more in two months’ time.

The Federal Reserve, when it seized the initiative in the fall of 1979, had forced up the price of money by nearly 100 percent in order to combat inflation. Now the Fed was allowing the price of money to fall, even more rapidly, back to the original level.

Many things caused the run-up and the descent—the explosive pressures of inflation, the shock effects of credit controls, the abrupt uncertainties of recession. They were also caused, inevitably, by the policy decisions of the Federal Reserve. Paul Volcker would confide to colleagues much later that he considered the dramatic easing of interest rates executed in the spring of 1980 as perhaps his largest mistake as Federal Reserve chairman.

But none of these arguments or errors at the Federal Reserve were known to the general public. It was a presidential election year and the press was busy reporting the campaign rhetoric of Jimmy Carter and his opponents, including their economic policies. Political reporters fully accepted the notion that the central bank was nonpolitical and, therefore, its actions were not relevant to elections. The Fed’s great mistake would soon become obvious, however, to those who followed the Fed closely. They could see something was wrong. The roller coaster was about to bottom out and to come lurching back up again.

By midsummer of 1980, the majority of the Federal Open Market Committee was confused. The great national economy was abruptly reviving, despite their forecasts and expectations. Instead of a normal contraction that lasted two or three quarters, as predicted, this one looked as if it was already over. Governor Nancy Teeters described the quandary: “I think I was really misled. I thought we really had broken the back of inflation. For a few months, it looked like the beginning of a classic recession. Durable goods had fallen off, so had housing. I was wrong. It turned out to be sharp but very short. Two months later, I had to change my mind.”

So did the others. By July, consumers were buying again and business activity was stirring with new life. Personal-consumption spending, which had fallen by $24 billion in real terms during the second quarter, was suddenly expanding again. Business investments in new plants and machinery were still depressed, but no longer declining sharply. Housing starts, after falling for five straight months, abruptly increased by 30 percent in June—a leading indicator for the rest of the economy.13

By early August, it was clear that the 1980 recession had ended. On the charts that record U.S. economic history, the contraction of 1980 looked bizarre—a sharp V on the trend line of economic growth. One quarter, the Gross National Product was contracting by nearly 10 percent; the next quarter it was alive again, expanding by 2.4 percent. This is not what the Federal Reserve had in mind in its fight against inflation. Monthly price increases were not as alarming as the peak earlier in the year, but they continued in double digits. After slowing briefly, the Consumer Price Index returned to an annual inflation rate close to 11 percent. Clearly, the war had not been won.

“By taking controls off and lowering rates,” John Paulus, a former Fed economist who was now at Morgan Stanley, explained, “the Fed aborted the recession and got none of the benefits. You could say they were playing politics, but at the same time you would have to say that in a few months they ended up increasing interest rates again.”14

The Fed, however, was making progress on one of its goals: the dollar’s long descent in value in international currency markets was halted. By midsummer, the price of the dollar stabilized against an index of foreign currencies and began slowly to rise, for the first time in many years. It was an important turning point, almost ignored at the time, for both the U.S. economy and the world’s. The terms of dollar-traded transactions began to shift gradually. The value of the hundreds of billions held internationally in dollar-denominated financial assets began to appreciate. The trend, once started, would continue with gathering force for the next five years—profoundly altering the patterns of world trade and wealth in the 1980s.

Stabilizing the dollar on world markets was the beginning of success for the Fed, even though domestic inflation continued strong. In part, the dollar’s turnaround probably reflected the growing conviction of international money traders that Volcker and the Fed meant what they said. But there was a more fundamental reason—the dollar’s new strength reflected the pull of Volcker’s high interest rates.

Despite all the complicated factors affecting currency trading, the international investors were driven most powerfully by a simple single question: where could their wealth find the highest return? When the Fed pushed U.S. interest rates far above the competing rates in other countries, wealth naturally began flowing toward dollar-denominated financial instruments. As more investors traded yen or pounds in order to get into dollar-denominated investments, the increased demand for dollars naturally stiffened the price. As long as the Fed maintained a wide differential—U.S. interest rates well above the foreign rates— the dollar would continue to grow stronger and stronger.

In the meantime, however, the Federal Reserve had undone itself at home. Its error would perhaps not sound like error to most citizens: the Fed had inadvertently restarted the American economy.

Its strategy in the spring had allowed interest rates—in the language of the money market—to fall in a matter of weeks by 1,000 basis points. For the real economy of consumers and producers, this decline amounted to a gigantic price cut. Imagine, for instance, that government policy somehow induced General Motors to reduce the price of its automobiles by 50 percent. A great many citizens would decide it was time to buy a Buick. Less neatly but more broadly, the sharp drop in interest rates worked the same way. When the price of borrowed money was cut in half, the result was a powerfully stimulative impact on aggregate demand. It was time again to borrow money and spend it.

Bank lending began expanding rapidly again and so did the money supply. M-l, which had been flat in May, grew by 11 percent in June. The next month, the money supply was expanding still faster, by more than 13 percent. In August, money growth exploded—the M-l aggregate increased at a rate of 22.8 percent. The turnaround was extraordinary: just two months before, M-l growth had been running below the FOMC’s objective. Now money was growing nearly four times faster than the Fed’s own target for 1980. The Federal Reserve had lost control.

If the governors in Washington set the wrong strategy, the banking system could swiftly magnify the error. The actual mechanics of money involved a subtlety that was rarely, if ever, mentioned in the textbooks but that greatly complicated the daily reality of the Federal Reserve’s money management. The textbooks described money creation as beginning with the Fed—it supplied more reserves and the banks made more loans and the loans became new deposits and, thus, a larger money supply. In the real world, the order was usually reversed: the banks made the new loans, then the Fed provided the new reserves to support them.

The typical sequence went like this: commercial banks initiated the process by making new loans, then scrambled around to find the added reserves required to support their expanded portfolios. The banks could borrow the needed reserve funds in the money market, or if excess reserves were scarce, the banks would be compelled to turn to the Discount window at the Fed and get the funds there.

Day by day, the Federal Reserve would always accommodate whatever was needed. The Fed might frown at and scold individual banks that came to the Discount window too frequently, but the Fed could not very well refuse the banking system’s need for new reserves. If the Fed refused on any given day to supply the reserves the banking system needed, then the scramble for scarce reserves would become desperate and inevitably some banks would come up short—that is, perhaps fail. That is precisely what the Federal Reserve was created to prevent—the short-term liquidity crises that wiped out otherwise solvent banks. Back in 1913, the Fed’s architects called it “elastic currency”—a money supply that could grow or shrink flexibly in accordance with the fluctuating credit demands of the nation.

So, day by day, the Fed would accommodate the loan commitments the banks had already made. In that sense, the Fed was always responding to events that had already occurred—bank loans that had already been made, demand deposits already created—and it had no practical choice except to ratify those existing realities by supplying whatever reserves the banking system needed. Its daily posture was reactive (a condition compounded by its own rule allowing banks to report their reserve and deposit totals with a lag of two weeks).

Yet the Fed was not impotent. Its control over money depended on choosing which method it would use to accommodate what the banking system needed in new reserves. It could pump in more reserves through the Open Market Desk—or it could refuse to accommodate the banks that way and, in effect, force them to come to the Discount window and ask for a short-term advance. The Fed would always lend them whatever they needed; not to do so would force a liquidity crisis. But this was a privilege banks could not overuse without inviting a regulatory investigation. In the meantime, the competition for scarce reserves would have bid up the Federal Funds rate—and influenced the entire spectrum of other short-term interest rates.

In crude terms, the Fed said to the banks: Okay, you can have the reserves you need today, but it’s going to cost you more than you expected. And tomorrow it might cost you even more. Today you borrowed at the Discount window, but, as you know, you can’t be coming back to the Discount window day after day without inviting nasty regulatory scrutiny of what’s wrong at your bank. So you had better adjust your own portfolio accordingly—or pay the price.

If the Fed kept doing this over a period of days or weeks, sooner or later the banks ought to get the message. The Federal Reserve’s leverage, thus, depended on coordinating its two money valves—the open-market operations and the Discount window—using them like a carrot and stick to prod or entice the banks. When the Fed tightened money, Discount borrowing soared and the squeeze was on. The process did not work instantly (nor as neatly as this description implies), but over time the Fed usually got its way.

For old hands on the Open Market Desk, this was the essence of central banking—the daily trader’s game the Fed played with the banking system and the interrelated money markets. The contest was both tangible and psychological. By adjusting its daily open-market strategy, adding or withholding reserves, the Fed nudged the banks and money markets. It bluffed them and on occasion deliberately frightened them. Eventually, if the strategy set in Washington was correct, the banks and the money traders moved in the desired direction. This time, the strategy was plainly wrong.

“The money supply began bouncing back,” Paul Volcker said, “which we didn’t mind for a month or two because it was just offsetting the decline. What we did not judge, we nor anybody else, was that economic decline itself was going to be so short-lived.” Volcker was expecting the surge of money growth to moderate, but it didn’t. The economy itself was expanding much faster than he had anticipated. The Fed had told financial markets to watch the money-supply numbers as an indicator of its policy—now the money supply told Wall Street that the Fed was easing up.

“If it hadn’t been the focus of so much attention,” Volcker told financial writer Andrew Tobias, “I don’t think it would have made much difference, but everyone had come to look at the money-supply figures as the symbol of policy. And we were in the midst of an election campaign, so everybody could attribute political interpretations to everything that happened. That didn’t help any.”15

Governor Partee, who in his off-hours liked to sail on Chesapeake Bay, described the Fed’s error in nautical terms: “In sailing, when you turn the rudder, the boat doesn’t do anything for a while. So you say to yourself, ‘My God, I didn’t do enough.’ So you turn some more. Pretty soon, you see the boat responding and you say, ‘My God, I’ve overturned. The boat is going way beyond where I wanted to be.’”

The Fed had oversteered in the spring and that produced an unintended feedback: lower interest rates stimulated the real economy and the real economy drove the money supply. This was roughly the reverse of how the monetarist doctrine envisioned the cause-and-effect relationship, but it was the way in which most Federal Reserve governors understood the matter. The experience of 1980 only seemed to confirm how the Federal Reserve had always looked at things: interest-rate movements were the best criterion for judging the impact of monetary policy, not changes in the money-supply numbers.

Henry Wallich later summarized the evidence:

At each turn, movements in interest rates were followed, with a lag of three to four months, by a movement of the economy in the opposite direction. The rise in interest rates during the first quarter was followed by the sharp decline in the economy during the second quarter. The decline in interest rates during the second quarter was followed by an upturn in the economy in the third. To make the case that the money supply, rather than the interest rates, moves the economy, one would have to assert that the money supply affected the economy with a zero lag.

None of these facts was entirely obvious in June, when Governor Lyle Gramley attended his first FOMC meeting. Gramley was replacing Philip Coldwell, and since he had served on Jimmy Carter’s Council of Economic Advisers, many in Wall Street dismissed him as another fainthearted liberal. Gramley was, without apology, Keynesian in his perspective as an economist, but, somewhat like Tony Solomon, he had been chastened by experience. The decade of inflation was widely blamed on a failure of will at the Federal Reserve, and Gramley was, above all, a “System man.” Except for his stint at the White House, he had served in the Fed since 1955. He did not wish to see it repeat the mistakes of the 1970s. In the next few years, Lyle Gramley would join Wallich as a persistent and influential hawk, the voice of experience arguing for a hard line.

“One of the first things I did when I came in as a board member,” Gramley said, “was to argue: We’ve got to stop trying to pump more money into the system. Putting more money into the system is going to be counterproductive.” The majority was not yet persuaded.

Like many of his colleagues, Gramley was from the small-town Middle West. He grew up in Aurora, Illinois, the son of a self-taught electrician, and he originally planned to become an electronics engineer. An inspiring teacher at Aurora College excited his interest in economics and he went on to earn graduate degrees at Indiana University. His first job as a research economist was at the Kansas City Federal Reserve Bank and he joined the Washington research staff in 1964. Twelve years later, he succeeded Chuck Partee as director of research and statistics when Partee became a governor. A slender man with dark brows and a solemn expression, Gramley’s manner was formal but cordial. Like some others on the board, his personal tastes had evolved a long way from his lower-middle-class origins. Gramley lived in the town-and-country suburb of Potomac, Maryland, and favored horses and fox hunting. A silver statuette of rider, horse and hounds graced his office mantel.

Gramley had never been in favor of the new operating system, though he appreciated the reasons why the other governors had embraced it. The problems he foresaw were much like those in Wallich’s analysis—targeting closely on the money supply would produce large swings in interest rates, and the interest-rate changes, both on the upside and the downside, would produce unintended shifts in the real economy, which would then feed back into the public’s demand for money. The Fed could get caught in a circular game—reacting to money-supply changes that had been caused by its own policy. “Chasing your own tail,” Gramley called it.

At the mid-August meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee, the majority was still not convinced that this is what the Federal Reserve had been doing. Gramley made his case, but he did not dissent. “I work internally,” he explained. “It is not that I would never dissent. I would, if I thought the policy were way off track. But what I try to do is to help shape policy in the course of the meeting, in the discussions, in ways that help it to go in the direction I think is appropriate. The point is, I would not dissent lightly.”

By September, the mistake was clear to everyone: the new money numbers showed the money supply had expanded in August by nearly 23 percent and the economy was picking up steam much faster than the Fed analysts had expected. Instead of being at the lower end of the growth range, M-l shot up toward the upper end of its target and was about to exceed it.

As the numbers became public, the Fed’s usual conservative critics became even more agitated. The Shadow Open Market Committee, which from the start had doubted the sincerity of the Federal Reserve’s commitment to monetarist doctrine, now had hard evidence to support its skepticism. The Fed, Professor Karl Brunner complained, “has condemned us to hear the litany of excuses obfuscating the failure of policy making. It also condemned us to watch a series of false or broken promises. Something is fundamentally wrong with the Fed’s policy making, requiring at this stage some radical action.”16

The twelve commercial bankers who served on the Federal Advisory Council were only slightly more polite. The bankers complained:

Fed operations to date have generated both greater volatility in interest rates and in money growth. . . . The result of the variability in money growth is a substantial whipsawing of interest rates and also a growing instability in financial markets. High volatility breeds uncertainty, reduces the credibility of Fed policy and raises inflationary expectations.

The bankers were clearly convinced that the monetarist critique was correct, for they urged the FOMC to abandon its focus on the level of interest rates altogether and let the market determine how high or low interest rates would go. This was one instance where the Fed policy makers were not going to follow the bankers’ advice. Many of the most respected governors were convinced that ignoring interest rates was exactly what got them into trouble in the first place. Yet the bankers’ opinions could not be dismissed, because they were an authentic expression of sentiment in the financial markets.

The FOMC members felt awkward when they looked back at what the new operating system had wrought. In the spring, the money supply declined in one month by more than 17 percent. By late summer, it had increased in one month by a record 22.8 percent. Henry Wal-lich, while he was too polite to claim vindication, observed the chagrin among his colleagues.

Tony Solomon was not so restrained. “It was embarrassing,” Solomon said. “The majority had miscalculated. Someone in my position, who had warned that this might happen, we were saying in a polite way: T told you so.’”

Fred Schultz, the vice chairman, acknowledged the mistake. “When the money supply jumped like it did, we maybe didn’t move quickly enough. But we really thought it was an aberration.”

Instead, it was now clear to the committee members that they faced an unpleasant choice. If they were to correct for their past errors, the Federal Reserve would once again have to tighten down on reserves and raise interest rates sharply—right in the middle of the presidential election.

In season and out, the members of the Federal Open Market Committee did not talk politics at the boardroom table, at least not when they were convened in formal session. A governor or a Reserve Bank president might make an oblique quip about how the politicians in the White House would react to the committee’s decisions or members would mull over the political implications in private conversations. But frank talk about elections was frowned upon severely. It was not done.

As a group, the governors had become extremely sensitive to the long-standing accusations that they manipulated the money supply in election years in order to insure a growing economy and help the incumbent party win re-election. Political scientists and economists had analyzed the patterns of money growth over three decades and found a striking consistency: with one or two important exceptions, the money supply always grew faster in presidential election years. When voters “feel good” about their own rising incomes and economic prospects, they are less inclined to throw the rascals out.17

Federal Reserve officials testily denied the accusations, year after year, and could point to the particular economic conditions of each election season to explain why their decisions were based on objective analysis, not politics. “There is a very high degree of self-conscious rectitude in the Federal Reserve,” a senior official at the New York Fed explained. Monetary policies during presidential election years was a tender subject for officials at the Federal Reserve.

“Our attitude toward the election,” said Vice Chairman Schultz, “is that we’d like to dig a foxhole and crawl in until it’s over.”

This disposition undoubtedly inhibited the policy makers from executing sharp, stringent policy moves in the middle of a campaign if such decisions could be postponed. The majority on the FOMC, for instance, might have been more open to the arguments for tightening sooner in the summer of 1980 if it had not been the season for presidential politics. Some governors, if pressed, would concede that during a campaign they would rather be easing than tightening if conditions permitted them to do so. Most of all, they wished for a smooth policy line that would avoid aggravating either political party.

The bumpy ride of 1980 was the opposite. In fact, the events of the election year simply did not support the theory that the Federal Reserve always tries to help the incumbent party. Some critics, especially Republican campaign advisers, concluded that the summer explosion of the money supply was the Fed’s desperate effort to save Jimmy Carter. Democrats knew better.

If the Fed was trying to re-elect Carter, it went about it in a very strange way. Volcker’s major policy shift in the autumn of 1979— undertaken despite the objections from the Carter White House— assumed the inevitable result would be an election-year recession, hardly designed to help the incumbent. And the inference that the Federal Reserve was trying to bail out the Democrats by pumping up money in the summer of 1980 assumed that the Fed was in control of events—that it somehow wanted M-l to grow by nearly 23 percent in August. In reality, the Fed was as dismayed as its critics.

The close evidence, if anything, supported the opposite case—that the Federal Reserve was indifferent to Jimmy Carter’s fate and quite willing to let monetary policy contribute to his defeat. That was not to say that the Federal Reserve wished to see Carter lose, only that it did not mind damaging his chances. For many months, the governors had been warned repeatedly by their own primary constituency, the commercial bankers who advised them, that they must not let “political pressures” divert them from a tough money policy. In the fall of 1980, the Fed placed its own prerogatives ahead of the President’s.

One former Fed economist, more cynical than most other alumni, said:

The Federal Reserve has its antennae up all the time, testing the highest winds. They saw the winds shifting to the private capitalistic philosophy of monetarism and so they shifted their operating techniques in that direction. What they did was chameleonlike—shifting away from Keynesian liberal philosophy and adopting the conservative monetarist philosophy. They were perfectly positioned for the Reagan election. In fact, they probably concluded from soundings back in the fall of 1979 that the country was headed toward a conservative victory and the country would be ready to accept a tight-money policy from the Fed.

The political implications came to a head in September when the Federal Open Market Committee could no longer defer a choice, regardless of the approaching election. If the committee did nothing, the money supply would continue to grow explosively, not as bad as the 22.8 percent growth in August but still far above reasonable levels. When the FOMC met on September 16, the committee members were in general agreement that they must reduce the money expansion substantially—pushing interest rates up again. Four dissenters, led by Wallich, wanted the Fed to be even tougher.

Committee members made a few weak jokes about the likely reaction from the Carter White House. “Bill Miller’s not going to like this,” one FOMC member remarked. Miller, the former Fed chairman, was not popular with his former colleagues, and they knew the Treasury Secretary would be upset by their action—along with the rest of the Carter Administration.

“The memory of ’72 still rankled enough,” said a senior Reserve Bank officer, “that there was determination to make sure that this did not become the case in 1980. There was a lot of talk among the staff about how holding fast in the face of Carter’s displeasure would turn the Democrats against us and confirm the old mythology that the central bank, down deep, prefers Republican Presidents.” Ironically, the official added, most of the central staff in Washington were Democrats, though this was not true of the senior economists at the twelve Reserve Banks.

The FOMC’s decision meant interest rates would be climbing again sharply—in the midst of a close and turbulent campaign. In the week of the FOMC meeting, the Federal Funds rate averaged 10.6 percent. Two weeks later, it was up to 12.4 percent. By the end of October, it was 13.1 percent. By election day, it was 14 percent. Other lending rates followed the same curve. The price of money was going up rapidly again.

As any experienced politician understood, rising interest rates constituted “feel bad” politics. One did not have to grasp the intricacies of monetary policy, the variable lags and all that, in order to know what the impact would be on voters. Bert Lance, the Georgia banker who had been one of Jimmy Carter’s most astute advisers, explained the political implications of money for the President early in his term.

“I always told the President,” Lance said, “that what you need to be concerned about is the rate of inflation and the direction of interest rates. If they are both going in the wrong direction in 1980, you’re not going to be re-elected. Carter understood that, but he never got control of the machinery.”18

One year before, too late to make any difference, Lance had warned the White House: if Paul Volcker was appointed chairman, the President’s re-election would be mortgaged to the Federal Reserve. Now, as interest rates started rising, it looked as though the Fed was calling in the mortgage. The President had both numbers going in the wrong direction, and, at that point, the election looked as if it would be quite close. A Gallup poll reported that Carter, after trailing Ronald Reagan for many months, was closing the gap, pulling even.

The decisions of the Federal Open Market Committee were kept secret for at least a month afterward, and while anyone could observe the rising interest rates, how could the White House attack a secret decision not yet made public? Treasury Secretary Miller had taken an oblique swipe, complaining that the Fed was “not communicating” sufficiently with the Administration.

On September 25, the Fed was compelled to go public. The Board of Governors unanimously approved a one-point increase in the Discount rate, from 10 to 11 percent. Since changes in the Discount rate were announced immediately, the decision served as clear confirmation that the Federal Reserve was driving up interest rates. Fred Schultz discussed the politics with Volcker. “He was worried about the Fed having such a high profile in an election campaign, about being in the eye of the storm,” the vice chairman said. “We all were. We just came to the conclusion that we had no choice. The timing was awful.”

The next day, Schultz got a call from one of the political operatives at the White House. “What the hell are you doing to us?” he asked. Schultz tried to explain: “The money supply has exploded. Inflation is running away. We don’t think we have a choice.” The White House adviser sullenly accepted the answer.

A week later, while campaigning at a backyard “town meeting” in Landover, Pennsylvania, the President attacked the Federal Reserve for its “ill-advised” decision to raise interest rates. The broadside was slightly out of character for Carter, who had made a point during his Presidency of not trying to pressure the Fed with public criticism or even allowing his economic advisers to do so.

The Fed is independent of the President [Carter explained to the gathering in Landover]. It’s just like the judicial system. I don’t have influence on it, but that doesn’t mean I have to sit mute. My own judgment is that the strictly monetary approach to the Fed’s decision on the Discount rate and other banking policies is ill-advised. I think the Federal Reserve Bank Board ought to look at other factors and balance them along with the supply of money.

The President’s attack was an extemporaneous outburst, an expression of tension and frustration, not deliberate strategy. “I don’t know what will happen with the new interest-rate increases,” he lamented. “My hope is that they will turn downward soon and help me politically and obviously help our nation economically.”

Criticizing the Federal Reserve became a repeated theme for Carter in the final weeks of the campaign. Both the Fed and the commercial banks were pushing interest rates too high, Carter complained, “more than economic circumstances warrant.” The prime rate, back up to 14 percent by early October, was criticized by Charles Schultze as “unjustified.” Treasury Secretary Miller added his own complaints. Volcker tried to soften the controversy by conceding that the banks had perhaps raised the prime too swiftly. “The prime rate is sometimes a little more jumpy on the upside than it is on the downside,” the chairman said.

The governors did not like becoming a campaign issue, but they were not exactly quaking either. “I said to myself, ‘Well, they’ve got to say something,’” Henry Wallich mused. “I don’t want to seem disrespectful of the federal government but—sticks and stones will break my bones, but words will never hurt me.”

In the closing weeks of the campaign, Ronald Reagan skillfully turned the money issue against the President—blaming him both for controlling the Fed and for scapegoating it. “The Carter-dominated Federal Reserve Board has now become Jimmy Carter’s whipping boy for at least trying ... to remedy the damage to the economy caused by the highest budget deficit in the history of the country,” Reagan declared.

When Reagan and Carter met in their only debate on October 28, the Republican candidate assailed Carter for economic policies that produced both double-digit inflation and rising unemployment. Carter, he said,

has blamed the people for inflation, OPEC, he’s blamed the Federal Reserve System, he has blamed the lack of productivity of the American people, he has then accused the people of living too well and that we must share in scarcity, we must sacrifice and get used to doing with less. We don’t have inflation because the people are living too well. We have inflation because the government is living too well.19

At that moment, a Gallup poll reported, the President was slightly ahead, 45 to 42 percent. In the last week, public opinion broke dramatically for Reagan. He was elected in a landslide, 51 to 41 percent, that swept a Republican majority into the Senate for the first time in twenty-eight years and ushered in a new era of conservative reform.

The incumbent President was, of course, defeated by many things —the hostages held in Iran, inflation and rising unemployment, and his own personal style. The final run-up of interest rates executed by the Federal Reserve was like the last wound. Some of the President’s advisers thought it had hurt him a lot. “If Carter could have gotten a down-tick in interest rates,” Bert Lance insisted, “he maybe wouldn’t have won, but it would have been a very tight election.”

After the election, the Federal Reserve continued what it had started, without the anxiety of political attacks. The Carter Administration was a lame duck and the Reagan campaign managers were busy preparing their own transition to power. In this interlude, the Fed engineered another record run-up of interest rates, more dramatic than the last one.

The Board of Governors raised the Discount rate again on November 14 and once more on December 4. It was back up to 13 percent, the same level as in May. At each monthly meeting in the fall, the Federal Open Market Committee agreed to tighten the reserve supply further, pushing interest rates upward toward a new peak. By Christmas week, the prime rate for bank loans would set a new record—21.5 percent.

At year’s end, the extraordinary ride on the roller coaster was visible to anyone savvy enough to understand the Fed’s money numbers. Money-supply growth rose and fell like a Yo-Yo in 1980: up 13 percent in February, down 17 percent in April, up nearly 23 percent in August, down 10 percent in December (see Appendix B for the monthly record of money, interest rates and the economy).

One year after Paul Volcker had launched his monetarist experiment, the bold initiative seemed a shambles, disparaged by all sides. “I’d give the Fed a ‘zero’ in both effort and performance,” Robert H. Parks, a professor at Pace University’s Graduate School of Business, told The Wall Street Journal. “It has been a disaster,” said David M. Jones, the Fed watcher at Aubrey G. Lanston & Company.20

The same zigzag pattern was visible in interest rates. The prime rate was 20 percent in early April, down to 11 percent on July 25, up to 21.5 percent on December 19. The Federal Funds rate, which the Fed controlled most reliably, began the year at a weekly average of 14 percent, rose to 19.4 percent in April, fell to below 9 percent in mid-July, then peaked again in December at 19.8 percent.

Volcker’s first year as chairman ended in embarrassment. He and other governors offered Congress complicated explanations for what had happened, citing all the extraneous factors. They denied that they had lost control. Nevertheless, among themselves, they did not obfuscate. They knew that their management of money in 1980 had accomplished little, except perhaps to deepen skepticism about the Federal Reserve.

Lyle Gramley went out to address business groups in the autumn, trying to convince them. He emphasized the Fed’s long-term commitment to hold down money growth until inflation was finally under control. As the Fed stuck to its intentions, he warned, tighter money would necessarily limit the economic growth they might expect from the new recovery. His audiences did not believe him.

I would say, “Now you better believe that the Federal Reserve is serious about this” [Gramley related]. Then the question-and-answer period would come and, after an appropriate lull, I would say, “I’d be very interested to hear from you—what are the inflationary expectations that underlie your business plans?” The common answer from the businessmen would be, “Well, 10 percent, 12 percent inflation, something like that.” I would say, “You people are wrong. I want you to know that. You are wrong. You are misunderstanding what the Federal Reserve is telling you and you ought to know that.”

I got nowhere. For years, the public had heard these ringing speeches from the Federal Reserve about fighting inflation. The Federal Reserve was always fighting inflation and nothing ever happened. They just didn’t believe the words and I can understand their skepticism.

The record created by Volcker’s new monetarist operating system was hardly persuasive. Inflation had moderated somewhat but was still above 10 percent. The Fed’s decision to let interest rates fluctuate more widely had turned into gyrations that no one at the central bank had foreseen—swings up and down by as much as ten percentage points. Beyond the financial markets, the Federal Reserve’s impact on the real economy was equally bizarre—an abrupt up and down of recession and recovery.

Anthony Solomon summarized the year: “If you think of monetary policy in the broad sense, including credit controls, the mini-recession and mini-recovery which followed were both abnormal and they were both caused by monetary policy.”

To Henry Wallich, the results were unavoidable, given the system they had adopted—and intolerable. “I thought I understood the nature of the monetarist prescription,” Wallich said. “By holding steady to the money supply, you get extreme swings of interest rates, followed by extreme swings of the money supply. The economy is kicked back and forth from floor to ceiling by a stable money supply. This is how this method would stabilize the economy—by kicking it through the ceiling and the floor.”

“A false start,” Paul Volcker himself conceded privately. The most he would claim in public was that 1980 had been a “holding action” for the Fed. “At very considerable cost, at very considerable turbulence, we more or less held inflation at bay,” the chairman said, “prevented it from getting worse.”21

Should the Fed continue with the money-target system it adopted in October 1979 or abandon it and return to the flexibility of its traditional methods? More and more FOMC members would eventually become disenchanted and yet the Fed stuck with the monetarist system.

“Notwithstanding the trauma of that year,” Solomon said, “we did not basically shake the monetarist view, the so-called pragmatic monetarist view that Volcker adopted, to keep the monetary aggregates as targets. There was still a feeling in the markets, notwithstanding the roller coaster of 1980, that if we stick to this monetary-targeting policy, it probably would work and there really was no alternative.”

If Wall Street believed, then the Fed must keep the faith. Volcker felt and others agreed that, like it or not, the Federal Reserve’s own credibility was now dependent on maintaining the commitment it had made in October 1979 to follow the Ms. Informally, however, a new consensus was developing: the Fed would continue to follow the monetarist prescription, but it would compromise, month to month, making its own flexible judgments. The system would become less automatic. The Fed would adhere to it less rigidly.

“We’ve seen what the method did,” Wallich said. “Some of us concluded we should moderate that. If interest rates went down again, we would not let them go down as far. Clearly, one had to moderate the implications of the system.”

The “trauma” of 1980, as Solomon called it, had a profound influence on the subsequent behavior of the Federal Reserve—an embarrassing episode that spooked the governors for years to come. At pivotal junctures in the future, whenever the money signals became confusing and the forecasts unclear, the policy makers would remind themselves of the fiasco of 1980. The memory was invoked repeatedly as their cautionary tale: if the Federal Reserve relaxed too soon, it might be hit with another boomerang and lose everything it had gained. Far better, the policy makers agreed, to hold tight too long.

The new consensus forming in late fall meant that the Federal Reserve must begin again what it had first set out to do in October 1979 —letting interest rates go high enough to retard the economy and break the inflationary pressures. Only this time, the policy makers agreed, they would not let things get away from them. Even more stringency would be required. They would not ease prematurely, no matter what the money aggregates signaled. In reality, the young recovery that had begun in July was already being challenged—and imperiled—by monetary policy.

As interest rates headed upward again, there was one persistent dissenter. On November 18, at the first meeting after the election, Nancy Teeters warned that the higher interest rates the FOMC was authorizing would “risk a major contraction in economic activity with a substantial rise in unemployment.” She dissented again and again —five times in all—as the FOMC pushed the Federal Funds rate to 19.8 percent.

“I was very disappointed that we hadn’t cracked inflation yet, but I still didn’t think we had to go to 20 percent interest rates,” Teeters said. “It would have taken longer, we would have stretched it out, but these interest rates were threatening a very serious recession.”

Her views were very much out of step with the majority, as she well knew. She cast the dissenting votes anyway. Teeters believed that a gradual approach would take longer but still be effective—and fewer people would be hurt. To others on the committee, her qualms about unemployment and business failures sounded like the old liberal Keynesian mind-set they had discarded.

“Once a consensus is formed, there is a very strong temptation to fall into line,” Teeters said. “Nobody pressured me, but I wanted to be on record. I thought rates had gone too high. I wanted to be able to say I voted against it. In retrospect, I don’t think I was wrong.”

PART TWO

THE

MONEY

QUESTION





