7 THE GOD ALMIGHTY DOLLAR


In the atrium of the Federal Reserve building, where sunlight glistens on cool marble, the artwork on display was both playful and profane. The Federal Reserve regularly circulated exhibits of fine art in its entrance halls, a grace note that enhanced the aura of patrician confidence and relieved the tedium of dry statistics. This exhibit, however, mocked and satirized. The series of collages by a New York artist, Barton Lidice Benes, seemed unexceptional until the viewer grasped the joke. Benes had chosen an odd medium. His art was made of shredded money.

Security Blanket was a visual pun, a seven-foot blanket woven from thin slices of paper that used to be Federal Reserve Notes. Balls was a meatball press, wrapped in currency, that turned out funny little balls of ground money. Laundered money disintegrated as it was scrubbed against a washboard. Money became things—a statue of Cupid, a fetish doll, a bust of King Midas—and money disappeared into rich patterns of color. In Entomology and Snacks, Benes turned the miser’s nightmare into a busy scene—dollar bills devoured by rodents, worms and insects, each leaving distinctive piles of detritus. A spider magically consumed a dollar bill and spun it into a fragile web.

“People are so serious about money,” Benes explained. “I guess I’m poking fun at that a little.” The Federal Reserve cooperated in the. send-up by providing the artist with a generous bundle of useless paper, about $6 million in shredded money, some of the old currency that Federal Reserve Banks routinely destroy when it is worn out. Benes was also grated legal dispensation for his art since it is a misdemeanor for anyone to deface American money.

I’m really not trying to make any messages about money [the artist said coyly]. All the critics look into it and come up with all kinds of things— like money is the root of all evil, money slips through your fingers. Some of that may be true. Money certainly slips through my fingers, I can’t get enough of it. But I’m not making any political statements. Money is just a medium. It’s just like paint to me. It’s fun. I want to have a good time with it.1

Despite disclaimers, the artist was reaching for a cosmic joke. Playing with money, treating it “just like paint” in the very corridors of the money temple, was a subversive act. By reducing money to its graphic content, possessing only the tangible qualities of color, shape and texture, Benes was exposing the power of the money illusion. Money has no meaning beyond its concrete existence; it is merely another object with certain physical properties.

The human mind insists otherwise. The mind confers real value and elaborate power on these mere scraps of paper. It infuses money with potent psychological meanings, a surrogate for mortal anxieties and yearnings that lie deep and unexpressed in everyone. The psyche insists that money has meaning. And so does the society. By stripping money down to its natural properties, Bene invites the viewer to escape, for a moment at least, the bondage of his own mind.

The Federal Reserve, quite literally, protected money’s illusions. The complex bundle of psychological meanings, the social consent, the fantastic implications attached to money—all were sustained by concealment, an austere distance from popular examination. The Fed provided that, with its secrecy and obscure language, with its tradition of mystery and unknowable processes. Ignorance was comforting, perhaps even necessary for belief, and the Federal Reserve’s mystique allowed people not to look directly upon these questions. Beyond politics and economics, the Federal Reserve’s odd social powers were also derived from the collective irrationality surrounding money. The Fed’s full stature as a governing institution could not be grasped without first glimpsing the hidden content of money itself.

The money illusion is ancient and universal, present in every transaction and absolutely necessary to every exchange. Money is worthless unless everyone believes in it. A buyer could not possibly offer a piece of paper in exchange for real goods—food or clothing or tools— if the seller did not also think the paper was really worth something.

This shared illusion was as old as stone coins and wampum, a power universally conferred by every society in history on any object that was ever regarded as money—seashells, dogs’ teeth, tobacco, whiskey, cattle, the shiny minerals called silver and gold, even paper, even numbers in an account book.

Contemporary citizens had difficulty acknowledging that they shared this linkage with the primitive past. Money was now embedded in elaborate technology, electronic accounting and payment systems that operated with dazzling speed and complexity. Today’s money seemed real, not at all like those quaint and amusing tokens used by ancient tribes. A dollar bill was rational; seashells were blind faith.

Modern money, of course, required the same leap of faith, the same social consent that primitive societies gave to their money. Modern money, in fact, was even more distant from concrete reality. Over the centuries, the evolution of money was a long and halting progression in which human societies hesitantly transferred their money faith from one object to another, at each step moving farther away from real value and closer to pure abstraction. The cattle used as currency by some African tribes were, after all, valuable in themselves. If the money illusion collapsed for some reason, the coins were still cattle. The seashells that became precious currency among aboriginal tribes in North America and other continents were desirable things. Tobacco, which was used as currency in some pre-Revolutionary colonies like Virginia and the Carolinas, was a valuable commodity in its own right. Even gold and silver were not entirely useless. They could be fashioned by an artist into beautiful objects.

In that sense, modern money was utterly worthless (and, therefore, more efficient as money because its value did not get confused with the value of real things). The money illusion was now refined to a new level of abstract faith, visible only if one consciously paused to consider how the money process had evolved. At each stage of history one could see money retreating from concrete reality.

Paper money, it is said, originated with the goldsmiths of Europe who held the private gold hoards deposited by wealthy citizens for safekeeping. The goldsmith issued a receipt for the gold deposit, and over time, it became clear that the receipt itself could be used in commerce since whoever owned that piece of paper could go to the goldsmith and claim the gold. Modern banking originated in the goldsmiths’ discovery that they could safely write more receipts and lend them to people, exceeding the total gold that was on hand, so long as they always kept a responsible minimum in reserve to honor withdrawals. This was the origin of fractional-reserve banking and the bank lending that created money. This private money system endured for centuries and was inherited by the American Republic: privately owned banks created money by issuing paper bank notes, paper backed by a promise that at any time it could be redeemed in gold.

In nineteenth-century America, the money in use consisted mainly of these privately issued bank notes, backed by gold or silver guarantees. The money’s value was really dependent, therefore, on the soundness and probity of each bank that issued notes. Banking scandals were recurrent, particularly on the frontier, where ambitious bankers, eager to make loans for new enterprises, sometimes printed paper money that had no gold behind it. Governments imposed regulations to keep banks honest, but the bankers still were free to create their own varieties of money. When banks failed, their money failed with them.

The money illusion was transferred to a new object with the rise of demand deposits, better known as checking accounts. Instead of currency, the paper money created by banks, people hesitantly came to accept that money also existed simply as an account in the bank’s ledger, redeemable by personal drafts or checks. In the United States, the transition was inadvertently stimulated by government regulation. The National Bank Act, enacted during the Civil War, placed a heavy tax on new bank notes issued by state banks, and in order to avoid the tax, banks encouraged customers to use demand deposits—writing personal checks instead of drawing out their money in cash. It took generations for the public to overcome its natural distrust of checks, but by 1900 most people were persuaded. Personal checks, written by the buyers themselves, were accepted as just as valuable as dollar bills. Currency remained in use, but demand deposits were by now the bulk of the money supply. The nationalization of currency issuance, completed with the creation of the Federal Reserve in 1913, simply continued this arrangement. A new dimension of trust had added to the illusion. .

Finally, the last prop for the money illusion was kicked away in this century: the gold standard was abandoned. Demand deposits had been backed by the same promise that applied to currency—any private citizen could, in theory, go to the bank and redeem his money in a quantity of gold. That promise was extinguished by government edict, starting with the warring nations of Europe during World War I, joined belatedly by the United States in 1933. Without the gold guarantee, money was only money—“legal tender for all debts, public and private,” as it says on every Federal Reserve Note. A citizen can still go to the bank and redeem it, but his money will be redeemed only in new, identical Federal Reserve Notes.2

In the long sweep of human history, the abandonment of gold was a fairly recent event, cheered by most mainstream economists as a progressive development but still deeply traumatic to many ordinary citizens. Without gold, what is money really worth? The question still troubles a fervent minority sometimes called “goldbugs,” people who yearn for a return of the old guarantee—“a dollar as good as gold” instead of the government-issued currency they speak of contemptuously as “fiat money.” John Maynard Keynes, on the contrary, described the transition from gold as a historic liberation for the world’s economies—an enlightened step beyond the fetishistic values attached to shiny minerals. “Commodity money” was replaced by “representative money.”3

Keynes agreed with the goldbugs on one point: without the gold standard, money must be managed. Its true value would ultimately be determined by governments, by the judgments of fallible human beings or, more specifically, by the monetary policies of central banks like the Federal Reserve. Many citizens find this itself deeply disturbing. They long for some system that would take money regulation out of human hands and return it to some fixed set of values that is impersonal—the “invisible hand” of market forces or perhaps a higher authority. In the meantime, every American coin, every bill offers them the reassuring motto: “In God We Trust.”

The money illusion endures for most citizens, however, because they never pause to examine it. Money becomes transparent only when it is followed through its chain of trusting users. An employee works faithfully through the week without recompense, confident that on Friday he will be given a piece of paper by his employer. The paper is given to his bank and the bank authorizes the worker to write new paper of his own at the supermarket. The supermarket gives him food in exchange and takes his paper to its own bank. The chain of exchanges goes on and on, agreed values moving through pieces of paper.

Next the paper itself disappears. Money becomes truly invisible. Americans are now in the midst of this great transition—transferring their money faith again, this time to objects that are even more intangible. Commerce relies increasingly now on transactions in which the social trust is conferred upon plastic cards. The plastic is not itself money, only a coded key that gives access to money. As computer technology advances and money terminals are placed in every outlet of commerce, the plastic cards will displace both checks and currency as the medium of exchange. The pieces of paper will all but disappear, no longer needed to represent real value.

Invisible money requires a deep faith (especially faith in the machines called computers), because no one can really see its physical presence. Even now, a citizen may purchase goods or send money around the world, for that matter, simply by talking over the telephone and reciting certain numerals from his plastic card—like a secret code that opens the cash drawer at the bank. Only there isn’t any cash drawer—only more numbers. When money is no longer represented even by paper, it becomes a pure abstraction, numbers filed somewhere in the memory of a distant computer. In the computer, it cannot be seen by anyone, neither its owner nor the bank clerk who does the accounting. At this point, money has been reduced to nothing more tangible than electronic impulses, recorded on tape, which can be read or altered or activated only by other electronic impulses. A playful artist like Benes who wishes to mock the human illusions of money may discover someday that he has no medium in which to work.

As Benes well understood, however, money is larger than the range of the human eye, more resonant than mere numbers. In human thought and experience, money embodies associative powers that, taken together, resemble religious feeling. Those unseen powers are the real core of the money illusion and Benes offered his own irreverent commentary on them.

The historic connection between money and religion was established in one culture after another: the temple was the first mint, where coins were sanctified by priest-kings and therefore accepted as trustworthy by members of the tribe. Moneta, the Latin root for “money,” was an epithet applied to the goddess Juno, in whose temple the first Roman coins were made. The state and the deity were synonymous and their powers intertwined. Greeks, Babylonians, Egyptians—virtually every early society conferred sacred qualities on its currency. Centuries later, without benefit of clergy, gold and silver maintained their own religious connotations. The association originated in a mystical correlation with Sun and Moon, supposedly confirmed by the mysteriously stable ratio in their values—1:13.5 gold to silver—which astrologers decided was a precise replica of the heavenly cycles. The religious quality of gold and silver endured long after the astrology disappeared and modern banking began issuing paper. The precious metals were, after all, created by God, not man.

Sophisticated modernity naturally resists the notion that money still retains religious content. On rare occasions, however, the connection is still expressed in the most explicit terms. A conservative Republican congressman from southern California, Bill Dannemeyer, wrote a newsletter to his constituents in which he explained how the U.S. government had offended God when it abandoned the gold standard.

It is not an accident [he wrote] that the American experiment with a paper dollar standard, a variable standard, has been going on at the same time that our culture has been questioning whether American civilization is based on the Judeo-Christian ethic or Secular Humanism. The former involves formal rules from God through the vehicle of the Bible. The latter involves variable rules adopted by man and adjusted as deemed appropriate.

In most circles, the congressman’s suggestion—that the gold standard was somehow derived from God’s law—would be dismissed as reactionary fantasy. In an enlightened age of high technology, it was unfashionably primitive to believe such things. Archaic civilizations may have been governed by mystical money, but surely not the rational minds of modern times. Money was only money, a medium of commerce, a store of wealth, a unit of measure, nothing more.

When Sigmund Freud was first attempting to chart the geography of the human psyche, he kept encountering an outrageous association —money and excrement. Gold stinks. Miserliness is “dirty.” Feces are the infant’s coin. “It is quite crazy,” Freud wrote to a colleague in 1897, “but completely analogous to the process by which words assume a transferred meaning as soon as new concepts appear requiring definition.”

Freud’s pioneering research relied principally on two sources of evidence: the dreams and recollections revealed by his early patients in psychoanalysis and the folklore of the ages, the inherited myths and fables, from Oedipus to medieval sorcery, that expressed ancient truths about human experience. These sources, he believed, spoke from the same wellspring, the human unconscious, and they confirmed one another’s revelations.

“I read one day,” Freud reported, “that the gold which the devil gave his victims regularly turned into excrement.” The next day, Freud said, one of his patients innocently recalled an odd memory of his childhood nurse who suffered from “money deliria.” Her money, the patient said suddenly, was always excrement. Freud noted other associations. The fabled alchemist who would create gold from dross was called Dukatenscheisser, literally “one who excretes ducats.” In early Babylon, gold was “the excrement of Hell.”4

Money and the power of the devil was a recurring connection in human experience. In the Middle Ages, Catholic theologians had denounced usurers as the devil’s agents. In the late twentieth century, a sociologist named Michael T. Taussig discovered that rural peasants in Colombia, as they were drawn into the commodity-exchange economy of modern capitalism, would devise their own devil legends to explain the dreadful power money and commerce now held over their lives.5 Freud would doubtless have regarded the Colombian peasants as confirmation of his original insights (so too would Karl Marx, who decried the human alienation of capitalist money cultures). Freud’s basic task was to decode these symbolic connections. “Have you ever seen a foreign newspaper after it has passed the censorship at the Russian frontier?” the doctor asked. “Words, sentences and whole paragraphs are blacked out, with the result that the remainder is unintelligible. A ‘Russian censorship’ occurs in the psychoses, and results in the apparently meaningless deliria.”

The blocked-out messages, Freud concluded, emanated from infantile experience—ideas, emotions, responses learned in the earliest months of human existence and, thus, universally shared by all throughout history’s stages. The infant’s elemental reactions to life do not disappear as he matures, but are deflected to other purposes, repeated in other circumstances and expressed unconsciously, cloaked by the irrational associations. Thus, for example, Freud traced the money-excrement connection to one of the baby’s earliest obligations in life—the act of defecation and the need to control it. It is, after all, one of the first expressions of self.

Freud could only speculate on exactly why the human mind transferred its response to feces to the object called money.

It is possible [he wrote] that the contrast between the most precious substance known to man and the most worthless, which he rejects as “something thrown out,” has contributed to this identification of gold with feces. . . . The original erotic interest in defecation is, as we know, destined to be extinguished in later years; it is in these years that the interest in money is making its appearance as something new which was unknown in childhood. This makes it easier for the earlier impulse, which is in the process of relinquishing its aim, to be carried over to the new one.

The public was at first scandalized by Freud’s remarkable assertions, but eventually accepting. Freudian overlays became so familiar they passed into the conventional wisdom about human behavior, exaggerated by popular usage into their own stereotypes. The modern version of a miser would be explained as an “anal personality,” obsessed with accumulating money but afraid to spend it. In the vernacular, he is a “tight ass.” The opposite type was the reckless spendthrift, consuming things obsessively like a baby sucking lustily at his mother’s breast, spending money as though he couldn’t wait to get rid of the filthy stuff.

In the Freudian context, the Federal Reserve seems strangely appropriate to its task. The Fed’s own style and temperament would obviously be described as “anal.” But, more importantly, the central bank’s unrelenting rectitude and rationality provide a social mask—a way to translate all of the infantile money impulses into acceptable, serious terms. No one would ever think of babies, excrement and the august central bank as extensions of the same human experience. In a sense, the Federal Reserve made money a suitable object for adults to handle.

As Freud explored further, he realized that the human expectations attached to money were far more complicated than his original definitions—money had multiple meanings. It had to do with life and death, love and power, acts of creation and destruction.

To visualize the Freudian subtext more imaginatively, one could ponder the psychological content in the myth of King Midas. Midas yearned for the golden touch and his desire became a curse. Every living thing he touched turned into gold, glistening but dead, even the food he ate, even his loving daughter. Midas reached enviously for the powers of the gods—the power to create—and it turned into a deadly gift. Money is an exquisite contradiction, uniting desire and dread.

“If one is not aware of these profound connections,” Freud concluded, “it is impossible to find one’s way about in the fantasies of human beings, in their associations, influenced as they are by the unconscious, and in their symptomatic language.” To illustrate the complexity, Freud strung together five simple words, each pregnant with psychological meaning, all depending upon the same symbols: “Feces—money—gift—baby—penis.”6

Money resonated in the unconscious with all those thoughts and more. The deep connections helped to explain why the money illusion endured over the millennia of history, despite its changing forms or the representative money introduced by modern rationalism. The illusion was freighted with a complex of contradictory ideas, each attached to the most elementary fears and aspirations in human life. As a unified whole, money resembled a man-made answer to divine questions.

When Americans spoke of someone who “worships the Almighty dollar,” the intent was disapproval. A wholesome human being did not make money his god. Indeed, that was the point of making lots of money and becoming rich—it enabled one to escape the tyranny. Popular how-to manuals on Wall Street investing promised the readers the steps to “financial independence.” Wealthy people, it was thought, can forget money, put it out of their minds and get on with real life. In practical experience, it did not seem to work out that way. Money expresses so many satisfying elements of human existence that even people who have accumulated massive surpluses, more money than they could possibly ever spend, were preoccupied with obtaining still more. If money was not God, it appeared to be the next best thing.

In reality, money in its psychological form, as the absolute means and thus as the unifying point of innumerable sequences of purposes, possesses a significant relationship to the notion of God . . . [Georg Simmel wrote]. The essence of God is that all diversities and contradictions in the world achieve a unity in him, that he is—according to a beautiful formulation of Nicolas de Cusa—the coincidentia oppositorum. Out of this idea, that in him all estrangements and all irreconcilables of existence find their unity and equalization, there arise the peace, the security, the all-embracing wealth of feeling that reverberate with the notion of God that we hold.

Money, like religion, unified life’s contradictions—the petty and the exalted, the confusing multiplicity of things and the elemental, immutable truths, the limits and the potential described by life and death. Simmel was a German sociologist whose epic work The Philosophy of Money was published in the same era when Sigmund Freud was exploring the meaning of money from a different perspective. Simmel anticipated Freud when he observed that only psychology could really get at the true relationship between money and religion since psychology “has the privilege of being unable to commit blasphemy.” Money, Simmel concluded, imitates life itself.

There is no more striking symbol of the completely dynamic character of the world than that of money [he wrote]. The meaning of money lies in the fact that it will be given away. When money stands still, it is no longer money according to specific value and significance. . . . Money is nothing but the vehicle for a movement in which everything else that is not in motion is completely extinguished ... it lives in continuous selfalienation from any given point and thus forms the counterpart and direct negation of all being in itself.

Money’s continuous action—“the wild scramble for money, the impulsiveness that money . . . spreads over the economy and indeed over life in general”—would seem to be in conflict with the sacred content, but, as Simmel noted, money’s constant motion actually enhances the “religious mood.” He explained:

Not only is the whole excitement and tension in the struggle for money the pre-condition for the blissful peace after the conquest, but that calmness of the soul that religion provides, that feeling of standing at the focal point of existence, attains its highest value for the consciousness only at the price of having searched and struggled for God.

Yet, while money seems connected with everything, it is also secretive—a way in which the individual can delineate his private self, separate from the mass, separate even from his close neighbors. With the dawn of money economies, Simmel wrote, “an otherwise unattainable secrecy” became possible to human beings, relying on the qualities of money itself—

its compressibility, which permits one to make someone rich by slipping a check into his hand without anybody’s noticing it; its abstractness and qualitylessness, through which transactions, acquisitions and changes in ownership can be rendered hidden and unrecognizable . . . and, finally, its effect-at-a-distance, which allows its investment in very remote and ever-changing values, and thus its complete withdrawal from the eyes of the immediate environment.7

Money confers social and political power, naturally. Those who have more of it than others use their wealth to dominate or control other human beings who have little or none. But money also gives power to a secret self, enabling it to pursue its own self-gratification in a singular fashion. Money’s most obvious expressive power is the ability to acquire things that satisfy the imagination—consuming goods that are utterly unrelated to necessity or even usefulness. The things, instead, fulfill elaborate fantasies of selfhood, a visible statement of who-I-am, like the primitive tribesmen who used feathers and facial paints to explain their status and inner character.

In 1899, the American economist Thorstein Veblen described the practice with contemptuous clarity in The Theory of the Leisure Class and gave it a name, “conspicuous consumption.” Money provided the manly prowess of the gambler, the social distinctions of owning certain dogs and horses, the pious self-congratulations of expensive funerals, the idle wealth of a walking stick, the exquisite subjugation of a woman’s corset. Things expressed self and differentiated the self from those who did not have these things.8

“Reputable wastefulness and futility,” Veblen called it, a predatory form of barbarism. He assumed mankind would shed these primitive fetishes when it evolved eventually to genuine civilization. But, even as Veblen wrote, the age of modern advertising was dawning—refining and amplifying the ability to attach inner fantasies to the things people buy with money. If Veblen were alive in the late twentieth century, he would doubtless shudder at the spectacle of superfluous consumption —urban dwellers who drive around city streets in pickup trucks pretending to be cowboys, automobiles advertised as sleek and ferocious wild animals, talking toilet bowls in television commercials that promise social respectability to insecure housewives.

Money buys dreams, even ludicrous ones. In that sense, as Freud suggested, it becomes like food—nourishing the self by gobbling up new things, feeding the fantasies. The prophet Isaiah asked his people: “Wherefore do you spend money for that which is not bread?” Veblen raised the same question.

Yet money also speaks to the self even when it is not spent, and perhaps more powerfully. People find that what is more enjoyable than spending their money is not spending it and savoring its possibilities (not unlike the power felt by Freud’s reluctant infant on the chamber pot). Money contains the “notion of possiblity,” Simmel wrote.

Money, like power, is a mere potentiality [he explained], which stores up a merely subjectively anticipatable future in the form of an objectively existing present. ... If one asserts that one “can” do something, then this means not only the mental anticipation of a future event, but an already existing state of energy, physical and psychic coordinations. . . . Whoever “can” play the piano, even if he does not do so, is different from someone who is unable to do so, not only in a future moment, but even at the present moment.

Money, therefore, contains a continuous illusion of immortal power —the psychic vehicle for defeating time itself by controlling the future. It is only an illusion; no mortal ever conquers time. Even the wealthiest must die eventually, and as American folk wisdom reminds them, “You can’t take it with you.” Nevertheless, people will try. They devote elaborate attention to what their money will be doing after they are gone—who will get it, what things it will buy, how its power can be preserved. The more money one has, the more serious this question becomes.

“It is really nothing but capability, in the sense of chances for the future, which gives significance to what we presently own,” Simmel explained, “but it is real capability in the sense of absolute certainty about the realization of such a future.”9 The certainty of money’s future is well understood by striving human beings as they make out their wills. The terms of inheritance allowed one to manipulate the future beyond death, rewarding or punishing the survivors with the leftover wealth. No one can be absolutely certain of living beyond the grave, but they know their money will.

Money and religious faith are intertwined in the most basic human aspiration—to conquer time, to escape the mortal bonds. Religions require rituals of redemption and renewal; money is an important artifact in the process—the gift to the gods to expunge past sins.

In primitive cultures, closely attuned to the cycles of the seasons, ritual gifts were offered at regular annual intervals, the winter solstice, the harvest or the birth of spring, as a form of redemption. The tribe was reconciled with its gods, old debts were extinguished and the cycle began anew, free of guilt. The modern vestige for Christians is the Christmas season, in which everyone redeems himself by buying presents. Jews fast on Yom Kippur and are supposed to avoid worldly goods, but it is also the season when synagogues hold their fund-raising drives. Money is the gift that cleanses.

Norman O. Brown explored the debt-guilt content of money and its other psychological aspects in a challenging essay entitled “Filthy Lucre,” published in his book Life Against Death, a radical critique of the money complex that synthesized ancient wisdom of the Greeks and the Bible with the modern insights of Marx and Freud, Veblen and Simmel. “Whatever the ultimate explanation of guilt may be,” Brown said, “we put forward the hypothesis that the whole money complex is rooted in the psychology of guilt.”

Even at its simplest level, money is used like a debt instrument, an obligation exchanged for real value. The action of commerce involves passing around pieces of debt paper, taking them from others and passing them on to someone else. In mass, the money economy represents a dense interweave of obligations that must be filled. Individual guilt may be eased by giving some of it away.

“How then does reciprocal giving help to get rid of the burden of guilt?” Brown asked. “Of course, it does not get rid of guilt, as the whole history of archaic and modern man shows. But it does represent man’s first attempt at a solution. Guilt is mitigated by being shared; man entered social organization in order to share guilt.”

The rise of capitalism offered if not an escape from mortal guilt at least a powerfully comforting salve. Capital accumulation directly challenged the church’s conception of the human condition, which is why the medieval monastics opposed it so vigorously. The old limits on human existence were overrun by new possibilities, not just in the tangible terms of higher living standards, but also in deeper psychic terms. Capitalism redefined the idea of time through the miracle of compound interest—money multiplying itself over time. The system seemed secular and rational, but it also contained the seeds of a new faith. “It is really a demonolatry,” Brown complained. “We no longer give the surplus to God; the process of producing an ever-expanding surplus is in itself now God.”

Under capitalism, money takes on a new illusion: money itself becomes a living thing. People are attracted to the process of capital formation and economic growth because they can now imagine that their money is alive. It is growing. It is reproducing itself. It lives from the past to the future in defiance of time. It has broken the ancient bounds, the sacred admonitions about man’s fate.

Money can become a surrogate life for its owner—treated as a living thing, as some people do. If cared for and encouraged, disciplined and protected, money can become a second self, but one that will not die. Some people are so smitten by the illusion of living money that they look after their accumulated capital with as much solicitude as they devote to their children.

Brown described money’s new magic:

. . things become alive and do what the man would like to do. Things become the god (the father of himself) that he would like to be: money breeds. The institution of interest presupposes not only cumulative time but also the displacement of the parental complex from the totemic group to the totemic possession, money. Thus money in the civilized economy comes to have a psychic value it never had in the archaic economy.

Thus, on a psychic plane, the Wall Street investor accomplishes what the alchemist could not—creating gold from dross, real wealth from mere paper, a living organism from raw numbers. Yet it is only an illusion, still. Money is not alive and it does not grant immortality. The myth of Midas endures in the modern money economy in a somewhat different form: the act of fulfilling a need provokes other needs, expanding desires instead of extinguishing them. The “game” of Wall Street—making money grow—has no satisfying conclusion because there is no obvious point at which opportunities are exhausted. Instead, it may only enlarge the hunger. Like the golden touch of Midas, the money illusion drives the investor to worry restlessly about missed opportunities and to renew his anxieties about the future. He will touch one more thing, acquire one more portion of wealth, only to discover that once it is in his grasp, the new money is also dead.

The circle of contradictions, thus, returns to where Freud began— the baby’s illusions about excrement. Norman Brown described the linkage:

Money is inorganic dead matter which has been made alive by inheriting the magic power which infantile narcissism attributes to the excremental product. Freud pointed out that it was an integral part of the anal symbolic complex to equate the feces with the penis. The infantile fantasy of becoming father of oneself first moves out to make magic use of objects instead of its own body when it gets attached to that object which both is and is not part of its own body, the feces. Money inherits the infantile magic of excrement and then is able to breed and have children: interest is an excrement.

Interest as excrement—it is difficult to imagine a thought that could be any more offensive to citizens of capitalist societies (or to the temple managers of the Federal Reserve). Interest on wealth was the core of the modern economic process. Brown’s assertion, however, was merely a sophisticated restatement, in Freudian terms, of the ancient admonitions, from the Babylonians to Saint Francis to Marx. The devil was present when a dead substance was invested with the illusion of life, when filthy lucre kept humankind distant from its own humanity.

Despite his grim analysis of human illusions, Brown also entertained a millennial vision: human society might someday move beyond the fantasies attached to money. That would require nothing less than a new religious perspective—a reordering of human consciousness in which the fear of death was displaced, and along with it, human guilt, and the predatory money impulses that accompany them. The model for Brown’s optimism was the psychoanalytic process invented by Sigmund Freud in which the patient overcomes his repressed fear and guilt by confronting them. If an individual could disarm the power of infantile fears by facing their irrationality, then, Brown believed, mankind in general could do the same.

“If we can imagine an unrepressed man—a man strong enough to live and therefore strong enough to die, and therefore what no man has ever been, an individual—such a man, having overcome guilt and anxiety, could have no money complex,” Brown concluded grandly.10

A truly radical proposition. The world is not yet “civilized.” Genuine humanity lies somewhere out there in an indistinct future—when people will be able to move beyond money. Brown’s vision connects obliquely with Veblen’s. It coincides more directly with the optimistic prophecy of John Maynard Keynes. In “Economic Possibilities for Our Grandchildren,” Keynes first described his hundred-year prediction of unimagined wealth, multiplied through the compounding of capital someday eliminating human want. Then, Keynes warned, human nature would confront a much more profound challenge:

When the accumulation of wealth is no longer of high social importance, there will be great changes in the code of morals. We shall be able to rid ourselves of many of the pseudo-moral principles which have hag-ridden us for two hundred years, by which we have exalted some of the most distasteful of human qualities into the position of the highest virtues. We shall be able to afford to dare to assess the money-motive at its true value. The love of money as a possession—as distinguished from the love of money as a means to the enjoyments and realities of life—will be recognized for what it is, a somewhat disgusting morbidity, one of those semicriminal, semi-pathological propensities which one hands over with a shudder to the specialists in mental disease.

This was a threatening prospect, Keynes acknowledged. “For the first time since his creation,” Keynes wrote, “man will be faced with his real, his permanent problem—how to use his freedom from pressing economic cares, how to occupy his leisure, which science and compound interest will have won for him, to live wisely and agreeably and wen.”11

Obviously, this hopeful vision was not about to be fulfilled in the present millennium. Human societies would live for some while longer with money and its complex illusions. Mysterious institutions would continue as the cloak needed to shield money’s mystery—protecting human secrets that everyone shared and yet did not wish to know.

The Federal Reserve was not a sacred temple. The seven governors were not high priests performing mystical rites. Yet the Fed inherited all the resonant feelings that surrounded money, the religious mood and the full freight of irrational meanings. The Federal Reserve’s decision making was the essence of secular rationalism, devoted to scientific theory. Yet it was still the modern equivalent of mysterious sanctification, for its officers performed the ancient priestly function: the creation of money. The central bank, notwithstanding its claims to rational method, enfolded itself in the same protective trappings that adorned the temple—secrecy, mystique, an awesome authority that was neither visible nor legible to mere mortals. Like the temple, the Fed did not answer to the people, it spoke for them. Its decrees were cast in a mysterious language people could not understand, but its voice, they knew, was powerful and important.

It is impossible to understand the Federal Reserve’s peculiarity as a political institution without this mythic function. The religious quality of money was a crucial element in the cultural expectations that surrounded the Fed. It helped to explain the Federal Reserve’s odd placement in the governing constellation of representative democracy —exempted from popular control when American civics boasted that the people were sovereign. While reformers insisted that democratic accountability be imposed on far less important matters of government, all efforts to democratize the central bank consistently failed. The idea was simply frightening.

The anomaly of the Federal Reserve was tolerated by the ignorant American populace, but at some irrational level it was probably also wished for. Reformers perennially complained that the Fed deliberately obstructed democratic inquiry with its evasions and elaborate rules of secrecy, but it was probably likewise true that many citizens preferred it that way.

Some Americans, an agitated minority, regarded the Fed itself as blasphemous—mortals who had usurped the powers of God. The gold-bugs, who wished to restore the guarantee of precious minerals behind paper money, really wanted to remove the money illusion from the influence of man-made decisions. The rigid monetarists, who campaigned for a fixed, immutable rule that would govern money growth, wished to accomplish the same thing, only in a rationalistic fashion. Either way, by gold or by a monetarist rule, money would become eternal again—protected from human manipulations. The majority had no opinion on these alternatives, and, indeed, no real understanding of how its money was managed by the Federal Reserve. The majority assumed what it had been taught—that money regulation was an arcane technical matter, an obscure managerial function of government without much importance to the great issues of democratic discourse. The confusing economic language employed by the Fed made it easier for citizens to block out the money question—to accept instead the powerful mystery.

This was odd but nonetheless true: in a great democracy, where political power depended upon information and every interest clamored for it, the American culture had repressed the knowledge of money. There is no other way to describe the mass ignorance or explain it except as a collective blocking out. Like the censored Russian newspapers mentioned by Freud, the meaning of money remained blacked out, unexamined in a nation that congratulated itself on free political debate. Every important cultural institution cooperated in the self-censorship: the mass media and the educational system, the turbulent community of elected politicians and, of course, the officers of the Federal Reserve itself. By their treatment of money management, all of them implied it was not a subject for general debate. The Federal Reserve was regarded as beyond the understanding of ordinary citizens; money was reserved for the fraternity of experts.

The general ignorance created its own political imbalance, enhancing the influence of the small minority who did understand the subject and cared most intensely. The community of investors—the 400,000 financial professionals of Wall Street and the wealth holders they represented—debated the money issue every day of the week. They conducted a running critique of the money managers at the Fed, and the Federal Reserve listened closely to their commentaries. The debate itself was not exactly secret, but only the most attentive citizens would know that it was going on, much less understand its relevance to their lives.

To demystify the Federal Reserve, one first had to understand that money did not require religious faith or buried fantasies or impenetrable technicalities. Money was, above all, a political question—a matter of deliberate choices made by the state. Money was like all political questions decided by fallible human beings, subject to the usual variables of political action—understanding and intent, influence and error. Money was an everyday argument among competing interests, in which some would benefit and some would lose, depending on the outcome. Money was a social plan that rewarded or punished, stimulated or restrained. Money might encourage democratic aspirations or thwart them.

Strangely enough, there was a time when millions of ordinary Americans understood this, even humble citizens with little or no education. When the money question was alive in American politics, before its meaning was repressed, before there was a temple called the Federal Reserve, people knew that money was politics and that democracy depended on it.





