8 DEMOCRATIC MONEY


The founding assumptions of the Federal Reserve System were first championed by a most unlikely group of Americans—not orthodox economists at prestigious universities, not important bankers on Wall Street and not the elected leaders of Republican and Democratic politics. The modern way of thinking about money and credit was first articulated by plain country people—hard-worn men and women, drearily poor and ill-educated, with barefoot children and bleak futures. Respectable opinion dismissed them as backward and dangerous—“hayseeds” spouting outrageous ideas. Yet, in adversity, these unsophisticated citizens discovered great talents within themselves and, together, they created an original political agenda for the nation. The wrenching irony of American history was that, while many of the Populist ideas eventually triumphed, the people themselves were utterly defeated.

The movement began in Lampasas County, Texas, when a group of desperate farmers gathered in 1877 to form the Knights of Reliance, organized to “more speedily educate ourselves” against impending ruin—the day “when all the balance of labor’s products become concentrated into the hands of a few, there to constitute a power that would enslave posterity.” The organization, soon renamed the Farmers Alliance, foundered at first, but the idea of cooperative action spread. Within a few years, 120 alliances were meeting across Texas, listening to their “traveling lecturers” explain the economic realities and describe remedies. By 1887, the Texas protest had been carried north to the Dakotas and east to the Carolinas; allied groups sprang up across the cotton belt of the South and the grain states of the Middle West.

By 1890, it was an energetic and angry national movement—electing its own congressmen and governors and meeting in grand conventions to formulate far-reaching demands. The Populist agenda became a source book for political reforms spanning the next fifty years: a progressive income tax; federal regulation of railroads, communications and other corporations; legal rights for labor unions; government price-stabilization and credit programs for farmers. Their core issue, however, the ruinous yoke that united failing farmers in political revolt, was money.

Populism’s brief and spontaneous drama was probably as close as the United States has ever come, before or since, to something resembling genuine democracy. It was a coarse and creative politics, in which ordinary citizens chose their own rowdy leaders, oblivious to the bounds set by respectable thinking, unintimidated by the established hierarchy of powerful interests and institutions. Historian Lawrence Goodwyn captured Populism’s essence and its substantive ambitions in his authoritative account, Democratic Promise: The Populist Moment in America. The agrarian revolt began modestly, Goodwyn explained, with

meetings where the whole family came, where the twilight suppers were, in the early days, laid out for ten or twenty members of the suballiance, or for hundreds at a county Alliance meeting, but which soon grew into vast spectacles; long trains of wagons, emblazoned with suballiance banners, stretching literally for miles, trekking to enormous encampments where five, ten and twenty thousand men and women listened intently to the plans of their Alliance and talked among themselves about those plans. At those encampments speakers, with growing confidence, pioneered a new political language to describe the “money trust,” the gold standard and the private national banking system that underlay all of their troubles in the lien system.

How is a democratic culture created? Apparently in such prosaic, powerful ways. When a farm family’s wagon crested a hill en route to a Fourth of July “Alliance Day” encampment and the occupants looked back to see thousands of other families trailed out behind them in wagon trains, the thought that “the Alliance is the people and the people are together” took on transforming possibilities.

The struggling farmers were brought together, more concretely, by the price of corn and wheat and cotton—falling prices, year after year, that ruined the most diligent among them. Wheat sold for $2.06 a bushel in 1866 and ten years later for only a dollar. By the 1880s, wheat was down to 80 cents a bushel. By the 1890s, wheat was getting only 60 cents and farmers in the Dakotas were selling theirs as low as 35 cents a bushel. The price of corn, which was 66 cents a bushel in 1866, was less than 30 cents three decades later and Kansas corn sold as low as 10 cents a bushel. Cotton prices followed a similar declining slope. The falling prices were accompanied inevitably by usurious interest rates. Both flowed from the same condition—a scarcity of money.

Price levels for basic commodities fell steadily for more than thirty years—the era known as the Great Deflation. Millions of hunble farm families were forced into deeper poverty. Many were compelled to surrender what they thought was their American birthright—ownership of their own modest plot of land, a tangible asset that meant selfsufficiency and freedom to the hardworking yeomanry. Every growing season, as prices fell, their land and labor became worth less. To begin again at the next planting, they must borrow more at punishing rates to buy seed and supplies, but by harvesttime, prices had fallen further and they were unable to pay off their obligations. To continue farming, they must borrow still more. Eventually, when the debt became overwhelming, they would forfeit the land to their creditors, just as the rentier accumulated larger and larger holdings when the French peasantry failed. The process—liquidation and consolidation—was as old as capitalism.

As a social arbiter, the great price deflation of the late nineteenth century worked the opposite of the inflationary era experienced by Americans in the 1960s and 1970s. Inflation damaged well-fixed families by eroding the value of their accumulated financial assets, but inflation also spread wealth widely—enabling the broad middle class to enjoy a higher standard of living and to acquire greater net worth, largely through borrowing and repaying their debts in depreciated dollars. Deflation reversed the process: anyone who owned financial assets automatically enjoyed greater wealth as prices fell. Their dollar assets could purchase more in real goods; the value of their accumulated capital was steadily increased. Citizens with little or no savings, debtors who depended solely on their own productive labor for their livelihoods, saw their incomes shrink—and the real burden of their debts grow larger. American folklore described the consequences with blunt fatalism: “The rich got richer and the poor got poorer.”

In every era of history, regardless of the changing political language, the money question was, inescapably, the bedrock of political choice. The debate over “hard money” and “easy money,” falling prices or rising prices, inflation versus deflation, was really an argument about which economic class must suffer, creditors or debtors, and which one would benefit, those who derived their incomes primarily from their accumulated financial wealth or those who still earned their livings by “the sweat of their brow.” American politics, not surprisingly, yearned for a golden mean between the two—an elusive state of neutrality called “price stability,” in which prices neither rose nor fell and neither economic class gained at the expense of the other. The ideal of stable money was held aloft by every generation of political leaders, regardless of their party or ideological persuasion. Yet neutral money was rarely realized in fact.

The plain people who carried the banners of the Farmers Alliance in the 1880s understood these implications in considerable detail. Modern Americans, educated in the conceit of ever-upward progress and familiar with complex technologies that were unimagined a hundred years ago, assumed that in every way they were more sophisticated than their forebears living in a simpler past. The politics of money was an ironic and important exception. Citizens of the nineteenth century were routinely familiar with the political implications of monetary policy and debated the question fiercely among themselves. Unencumbered by the veil of modern economics, ordinary people formed their own opinions on complicated aspects of money and credit, subjects that in the twentieth century became reserved for experts only. In this one dimension, at least, modern Americans were more ignorant than their ancestors.

At scores of prairie encampments, the Alliance lecturers explained to earnest audiences the source of their ruination: it was the gold standard and the private banking system that enforced its rigid terms. The money problem really started with the Civil War. Abraham Lincoln, like other presidents and kings before him, was compelled to set aside the orthodox rules of “sound money” in order to win the war and preserve the Union. To ensure ample credit, Congress suspended the gold guarantee required for bank notes. To finance the Grand Army of the Republic, Lincoln borrowed the then-astounding sum of $2.6 billion. Even more daring, the President issued nearly $500 million in paper money that was not backed by gold—the “greenbacks”—currency that was not backed by anything but the government’s word (thus, fiat money is money created simply by government decree). All together, these actions constituted a gross expansion of the money supply, and the predictable result was roaring inflation. From 1861 to 1864, prices rose by 74 percent, the steepest inflationary spike since the Revolution. The period was a flush time for farmers (farmers of the victorious North, that is) and highly stimulative for manufacturing too. Great new industrial centers arose rapidly, financed with cheap money and nourished on the demands of war.

After Appomattox, accounts were settled and farmers slowly began to grasp that the financial balance had been set permanently against them. Farmers of the Middle West voted Republican, but the newly dominant political party listened to the financiers of the East, who demanded a swift return to “sound money.” Lincoln’s “greenbacks” were gradually retired from circulation, without anything to replace them. The gold standard was reimposed on all currency. Worse, the restoration of gold pegged money’s value at its old prewar level of parity—an ounce of gold would once again be worth $20. That meant not just an end to inflation, but that prices must inevitably decline to their old prewar level too. The money supply was, in effect, being shrunk back to its original size—“hardened” dollars that would buy more for those who owned them.

This took some years to accomplish, but it did happen: by 1884, the national price level had declined to exactly where it had been in 1860. Then it fell further. As producers often do, the farmers tried to compensate for the falling prices by growing more wheat and corn and cotton—which only compounded their problems. The new mechanization of agriculture made it possible to produce greater yields, but the excess supply of commodities depressed crop prices still further, even below the prewar level, and the small farmers became even more vulnerable to the demands of creditors. One of the fondest speculations of the Populist rebels was that if Lincoln had lived he would not have let this happen to them.1

Whatever its virtues, the gold standard did not guarantee stable prices. Price stability under the gold standard, contrary to what its advocates have perennially claimed, was actually a rare and temporary condition that usually lasted no more than a couple of years. The historical record clearly demonstrated this, yet modern politicians and economists who espoused the gold standard as the only cure for inflation persisted in distorting the actual experience of the past. Typically, they alluded to the nineteenth century as a halcyon time of orderly growth and stable prices, when money’s value was anchored by gold. The twentieth century, in contrast, was described as permanently biased toward inflation, fed by the paper money created en fiat by the Federal Reserve, unrestrained by the gold standard’s guarantee of real value. To illustrate, gold advocates liked to point out that the price level in the United States in 1800 was almost precisely the same more than a century later—when the gold standard was permanently abandoned. This left out what happened to prices in between. The observation was narrowly correct, but fatuous—equivalent to suggesting that an airplane mainly flew on the ground, since, after all, it began and ended its flight at ground level.

Prices, in fact, both rose and fell drastically throughout the nineteenth century—despite the gold standard and sometimes because of it. Wars interrupted gold’s discipline or eras of expansionary credit produced bursts of inflation, in spite of gold.2 The gold standard’s effect was to eventually drive prices back down again, producing eras of disaster and disorder, not political peace (see Appendix A for a graphic illustration of U.S. price history). Indeed, the longest recorded stretch of genuine stability in the U.S. price average was actually one of the nation’s most fractious periods—the years from 1885 to 1893 when America’s farmers were driven to their desperate political rebellion and the fledgling labor movement was struggling combatively to protect workers’ wages. The index of prices remained flat for nine years, but farmers’ prices were falling while prices for other productive sectors of the economy were rising—a turbulent condition that looked like economic stability only if viewed as a statistical abstraction (and only in distant hindsight).3

America’s experience with unstable money was typical, not an aberration of history. Cycles of price inflation and deflation were recurring rhythms in the world’s commerce long before there was a United States of America. They appeared in capitalist economies regardless of whether the currency was gold or silver or copper or a combination of those metals. Inflation occurred regularly both when governments managed the money and also when money was totally controlled by private market forces, with central banks and without them. The master historian Fernand Braudel, in his epic chronicle of the rise of capitalism, described the enduring competition between gold and silver money and the epochs of unstable prices that swept across continents and centuries:

Their production was irregular and never very flexible, so that depending on circumstances, one of the two metals would be relatively more plentiful than the other; then, with varying degrees of slowness, the situation would reverse, and so on. This resulted in upsets and disasters on the exchanges, and led above all to those slow but powerful fluctuations which were a feature of the monetary ancien regime. . . .

Ancient theoreticians would have liked a fixed relationship giving gold twelve times the value of silver for equal weights. This was certainly not the general rule from the fifteenth to the eighteenth century. The ratio at that time varied frequently around and beyond this so-called “natural” relationship. In the long term, the scales sometimes tipped towards one metal, sometimes towards the other. . . . The value of silver increased from the thirteenth to the sixteenth century, until roughly 1550. At the risk of straining the meaning of the word, we might say this was an age of gold inflation, which lasted for several centuries.

Braudel’s sweeping and meticulous survey of premodern capitalism demonstrated, in fact, that none of the twentieth century’s problems with money was particularly novel. For at least six centuries, the emerging capitalist system of Europe struggled with the same issues associated with an unstable money supply—repeated devaluations of currency, foreign-exchange imbalances between merchant cities and nations, economic depressions induced by a scarcity of money and economic booms stimulated by “easy money.” In the sixteenth century, France experienced a century-long price inflation of more than 600 percent (roughly equivalent to U.S. price inflation over the last forty years). The city of Naples had a money stock of 700,000 ducats in 1570, which grew to 18 million ducats by 1751, a huge reserve of excess money, four times greater than what commerce required. When it could not be spent, the surplus money was made into usable objects—silver watches, snuffboxes, cane handles, forks and spoons, cups and plates.

In that context, one of the greatest inflationary acts ever undertaken by a sovereign government was the discovery of the Americas—the money supply of Europe was grossly multiplied by the import of precious metals plundered from the Incan mines. A long inflation resulted. In 1500, Braudel estimated, Europe had twenty thousand tons of silver. By 1650, another sixteen thousand tons had been added to the money supply. The gold inflation that had prevailed for three centuries was displaced by silver inflation as the value of silver currency was cheapened. The era produced the paradoxical maxim known as Gresham’s law (named for Queen Elizabeth I’s counselor): “Bad money drives out good.” In other words, buyers will always prefer to use a watered-down currency to purchase real goods rather than a more precious one, for obvious reasons. It’s cheaper. Gresham’s law became less relevant once the competition between silver and gold disappeared and governments moved to fiat money, but it still expressed the eternal uncertainty over money’s correct value.4

In fact, the long and turbulent history of inflation and deflation cycles suggested a heretical proposition: capitalism could not long abide stable prices. Otherwise, the centuries of experiment and innovation would surely have devised a monetary system that could provide stability. Perhaps, instead, the process of capital accumulation actually produced periodic cycles of changing money values—inflationary “easy money” to stimulate economic growth and spread wealth, followed by its depressant opposite, “hard money,” which slowed down growth and reconsolidated the ownership of the newly created wealth. Certainly, that described the changing tides under which capitalism had flourished, from its most primitive stages to the present abundance.

If this proposition was correct, then the conventional opinion of both politics and economics was astride a deep paradox of capitalism: price stability was everyone’s supposed goal and yet the economic system could not live with it. All economic participants, from consumers to capitalists, from merchants to manufacturers, sincerely wished for stable money, but any government or money system that successfully made stable money a permanent fact would eventually be confronted with political upheaval. No matter how prices were measured, there simply was no golden mean for money where every economic player would be treated with perfect equality. Money that was fixed in perpetual equilibrium, the ideal espoused by Western capitalism for centuries, would in fact be the formula for permanent stagnation and destruction. No government that depended on democratic elections for its authority could impose such conditions on its citizens and long endure.

The political obstacles that confronted the Populists were staggering. Charles W. Macune, one of the movement’s most inventive intellectuals, recognized that political realities were fully against their reform agenda. “The people we seek to relieve from the oppression of unjust conditions,” Macune observed, “are the largest and most conservative class of citizens in this country.” In addition to their natural conservatism, the yeoman farmers were also divided by the inherited bitterness of region and party and the still-fresh memories of Civil War. Southern whites, many of whom had fought in the failed rebellion, were raised as Democrats, the “party of the fathers.” The grain farmers of the Middle West were Yankee veterans who rallied to Republican orations invoking the “bloody shirt” and Lincoln’s noble crusade to save the Union. To unite these two hostile groups in collective action—and also to include the newly freed blacks who were landless tenant farmers across the South—seemed an impossible aspiration. It was a measure of the general desperation that the Farmers Alliance even tried.

Across the cotton states, small farmers existed in a state of virtual peonage, their everyday lives held in bondage by the crop-lien system, an American version of the medieval usurer. In every hamlet, the “furnishing merchant” provided farm families with staples and supplies and took a lien on the farmer’s cotton crop as security. If a farmer bought something for cash, he paid one price, but if he purchased on credit, he would pay 25 to 50 percent more. At the end of the season, when his crops were sold and his account settled, the “furnishing man” would add another 33 percent or so for interest. The real interest rate, thus, approached or exceeded 100 percent. There was nowhere else to turn; other merchants or banks would not extend credit to someone who was already indebted. With falling cotton prices, it was impossible for farmers to “pay out,” and so the merchants took notes against the farmers’ land. As the debts mounted and forfeiture was inescapable, tens of thousands of farmers—eventually millions of people—“descended into the world of landless tenantry,” as Lawrence Goodwyn wrote. They became hired hands, sharecropping on the farms they had once owned, or displaced immigrants who streamed to the cities. This wholesale liquidation was entwined in the South’s bitter memory of Reconstruction, the legacy that led Populist legislators, once they had gained power in places like Arkansas, to write stringent prohibitions of usury into their state laws and constitutions.

Usurious lending also afflicted farmers in the Middle West, though less dramatically, as they struggled to stay ahead of falling prices. The age of mechanization was opening and farmers were advised that the only way to maintain their income levels was to increase their efficiency—to produce greater yields from the same land and labor. The new machines they purchased on credit typically carried annual interest rates of 18 to 36 percent—chattel mortgages they would have to pay off in steadily appreciating dollars. When the farmers went to ship their grain, the railroads squeezed them further with arbitrary freight rates. “The farmer in the West,” Goodwyn wrote, “felt there was something wrong with a system that made him pay a bushel of corn in freight costs for every bushel he shipped.”

But the credit problem was larger than the personal anxieties of farmers sinking deeper into debt. The tight-money conditions imposed by restoration of the gold standard guaranteed permanently high interest rates, and the higher profits naturally flowed to the lenders, the banking system and the owners of wealth. But the money-and-credit system also creaked with rigidity and periodically broke down. When the demand for borrowing surged, typically in step with agricultural seasons, the money supply could not quickly or easily expand to provide additional credit, given the rules of the gold standard. Money creation was based on the quantity of gold in reserve, and, thus, more money could not be produced by the banking system until it acquired more gold reserves, usually by borrowing them from Europe. It took fifteen days for a shipment of gold to cross the Atlantic. In the meantime, the banking system was on its own.

The result, again and again when credit became scarce, was a rolling wave of illiquidity that rippled through the financial system, starving commerce for short-term credit and ruining hundreds of banks.

The squeeze typically started in the South and West—farmers bringing crops to market, merchants and traders needing short-term loans to finance the swollen transactions of local trade. When rural banks exhausted their resources, they turned to larger city banks for temporary loans. When the larger banks ran out of reserve funds, they turned to the money centers of the United States, the oldest and largest banks of New York or Chicago or St. Louis, which were great storehouses for America’s accumulated fortunes.

Thus, as country bankers and their farm customers bitterly understood, life-or-death decisions over the economic health of Kansas or Texas or Mississippi resided ultimately in the distant offices of Wall Street, controlled by the dominant financiers like J. P. Morgan. When financial panic threatened, the money-center banks could usually provide sufficient temporary loans to allow the provincial banks to get through. Then as now, the banking system was interconnected by this fluid relationship among individual banks, which, in effect, transferred surplus funds to the institutions that needed them or laid off burgeoning loan commitments on the other banks that could absorb them.

Before 1913, however, there was no central bank to help banks through short-term liquidity squeezes. The only “lender of last resort” available to bail out the banking system was Wall Street—the despised “money trust” of Populist oratory. The house of Morgan would typically organize a syndicate of major lenders who came to the. rescue with a package of loans to other banks (and who, not incidentally, charged very profitable rates for their risk). If the money-center bankers decided for their own reasons that they were unable to fill all the nation’s demands for liquidity, then somewhere at the other end of the line banks failed and local commerce froze. This experience produced regional resentments and the abiding prejudice against Wall Street that still echoes in politics. Southern or western senators, including conservative Republicans, were likely to be much more suspicious of the financial system’s control and more impatient with high interest rates than colleagues who grew up closer to the money-center banks.

Between price deflation and the inflexible money system, the national economy was regularly destabilized—contractions that added unemployment in mines and manufacturing to the woes of the farmers. The severe depression from 1873 to 1879 was the longest in U.S. history. Another contraction occurred in 1882 and lasted more than three years. A full-scale bank panic in the spring of 1893 led to two back-to-back recessions that lasted until 1897. The proximate cause of the panic of ’93, according to Milton Friedman and Anna Schwartz, was depositors’ fear about bank solvency, but the “deeper cause,” they added, “was doubtless the preceding price deflation. Loans that would have been good and banks that would have been solvent if prices had been stable or rising became bad loans and insolvent banks under the pressure of price deflation.”5

Ruin for some was prosperity for others. Friedman and Schwartz calculated that the national economy’s output of goods actually increased fairly steadily throughout the three decades of deflation, despite the deep recessions, despite falling prices. The major source of growth was manufacturing, which was displacing agriculture as the country’s premier economic activity. The census of 1890 was the first in which the value of manufactured goods exceeded that of farm products.

The Populists first proposed a solution to the money question in August 1886 at Cleburne, Texas, where the Farmers Alliance met in state convention. The “Cleburne Demands” borrowed heavily from the Greenback Party, which in the previous decade had fought the gold standard and defended Lincoln’s fiat currency. The Texas farmers endorsed what for them was a radical departure—federal regulation of the banking system and a national currency that was not restrained by gold. But, unlike the liberal reformers who succeeded them in the twentieth century, the Populists were suspicious of centralized power in any form. They may have despised Wall Street bankers, but they distrusted Washington politicians almost as fervently. The North Carolina leader L. L. Polk once declared: “Congress could give us a bill in forty-eight hours that would relieve us, but Wall Street says nay. ... I believe that both parties are afraid of Wall Street. They are not afraid of the people.” Nevertheless, it seemed to the Populists that the federal government was the only center of power that could remedy the money problem.

The new “greenbacks” that the Populists proposed would provide the nation with a flexible money supply, one that could expand or shrink by government management to meet the real credit needs of the marketplace. The Populists’ aim was frankly inflationist—getting prices to increase so they could earn livable incomes from their produce. To achieve that, the money supply must be greatly expanded, both through more silver and gold coinage and the new paper money they proposed. Treasury would issue government dollar bills as legal tender to replace the private bank notes in circulation. Congress would regulate money growth. In a subsequent refinement, the Alliance platform defined the “greenbacks” in the same words that would later appear on every Federal Reserve Note: “. . . legal tender for all debts, public and private.”

Orthodox economists, bankers and politicians scoffed. Under the Populist scheme, what was to keep the government from printing money ad infinitum? Growth of the money supply, the rural leaders explained, would be geared to the reality of the growing economy— “per capita circulation that shall increase as the population and business interests of the country expand.” The money supply would be democratically controlled by elected representatives, not by an oligarchy of financiers and not by the mystical values attached to precious metals. At the time, it sounded like a dangerous invitation to anarchy. Three decades later, the Populist proposition was, in rough outline, the same economic principle that the Federal Reserve adopted.

By then, the agrarian reformers were defeated, their popular movement crushed. Their political energy was first co-opted by the Democrats and then vanquished by the Republicans. The central bank that Congress eventually created in 1913 was not at all what the Populists had in mind.

Something in the American character resented the idea of a central bank. It seemed undemocratic, and for nearly a century, the young Republic existed without one. When an embryonic version, the Bank of the United States, began operations in 1817, it was denounced as “the Monster” and was dismantled seventeen years later. Andrew Jackson built the Democratic Party around the question of whether a central bank was compatible with American ideals. Popular will— “the real people,” as Jackson called them—agreed with him. A central bank meant “control would be exercised by a few over the political conduct of the many by first acquiring that control over the labor and earnings of the great body of people.” In 1832, President Jackson vetoed legislation to keep the Bank of the United States alive. The following year the Treasury withdrew its funds from the Bank and deposited the money in a number of selected state banks, and the nation returned to “free banking” and unfettered economic development.

In the textbook summaries that schoolchildren must read, Jackson’s Bank War sounded like a cranky oddment of history, one of those dead controversies from the past for which students are required to memorize the dates, but not to understand. It was, in fact, a seminal conflict in American politics—one of those basic arguments of purpose that did not go away with time, but merely evolved in form and language. Properly understood, the Bank issue raised by Jacksonian Democrats really involved the same questions that political parties always engage whenever they decide economic policy for the nation: How fast can the American economy grow? What is the full potential for an expanding prosperity that will spread its benefits widely? What are the risks? The subject has now been given an austere title— macroeconomics—and the presumption of bloodless objectivity. But, in every era, the dispute is also governed by visceral feeling—a debate between caution and optimism, between wary moderation and boundless faith.

Optimism won in Jackson’s time, as it usually did in American politics. Aside from the heroic stature of its leader, “Jacksonian Democracy” was a powerful set of ideals, all derived from essential elements of the American spirit—the ambitious striving of individual enterprise, the celebration of productive labor over finance, an enduring suspicion of centralized power and, above all, the yearning for a new kind of society in which every citizen would be his own master, beholden to no other. Jackson’s economic program spoke for all those ideals. The “Monster Bank” was an authentic symbol for the economic forces that threatened them.

In economic terms, the agenda was internally inconsistent. The Jacksonians described themselves as conscientious hard-money men who supported the rigid discipline of the gold standard, yet they opposed the newly powerful national Bank because it restrained the expansion of credit and, thus, thwarted robust economic expansion. Formal thinkers were always offended when a political leader embraced competing ideas that did not logically go together, but contradiction did not necessarily weaken his popular standing. A political agenda might actually be strengthened by rhetorical inconsistencies —the appealing promise that it could accomplish all things at once, by reconciling opposites, by refusing to choose between conflicting desires. Andrew Jackson could be for sound money and, at the same time, be against the autocratic bankers who wanted to hold back American prosperity by restraining money and credit. The “real people” wanted both. The same political values (and the same contradictions) resonated in the economic debates of the late twentieth century.

The Bank of the United States was chartered by Congress amid the inflationary surge caused by the War of 1812; its purpose was to restore stability to the nation’s money and credit and also to restore the bondholders who had lent their private wealth to the government to finance the war. This was America’s second experiment in central banking. The first Bank of the United States had been launched by Alexander Hamilton after the Revolution, then allowed to expire in 1811. The second BUS was housed in a Greek temple in Philadelphia and was directed for a number of years by Nicholas Biddle, a brilliant financier from a famously wealthy family. As a matter of institutional history, the central bank was descended from kings, the inheritor of the monarch’s authority, and the proximate model was the Bank of England, chartered in 1694. In the United States, however, the people themselves were supposed to be the sovereign.

In a very short time, the second Bank accumulated enormous financial power. It held the federal government’s deposits interest free and was also the largest store of private wealth. It became the dominant player in foreign exchange and the domestic money market—the place where other banks turned for reserves and where commercial ventures applied for capital. Thus, in a rough fashion, the Bank performed the same functions that would be assumed by the major financial houses of Wall Street in the Populist era and also the role of the Federal Reserve in the twentieth century—the “lender of last resort” that could save a foundering bank or doom it. Like the Fed, Biddle’s Bank also attempted to regulate the economy, restraining credit when it appeared that speculative lending was becoming dangerously excessive or stimulating activity with easier terms if a recession was threatening. The tools were more primitive, knowledge of the economy less sophisticated, but Biddle would be celebrated by later generations of economic historians for his advanced grasp of business and finance.

In his own time, however, Biddle was the reincarnation of autocratic control—the few ruling over the many—precisely what sincere republicans sought to escape in America. Jackson defined his constituency of “real people” as planters, farmers, mechanics, laborers, the individual producers whose restless energies and common sense formed “the bone and sinew of the country.” These were the raw and unsophisticated yeomanry who trampled the White House parlors on Jackson’s Inaugural Day; he was the first President elected without the genteel credentials of Virginia or Boston. Their values were freedom, equality and the individual pursuit of happiness—unconstrained by a meddling government or anyone else.

Jackson’s constituency was alive to opportunity—opening the frontier territory to agriculture and mining, developing roads and canals and railroads that would link up markets, constructing new towns and cities. Yet they also felt threatened. Their aspirations, their economic independence, seemed endangered by an encroaching web of concentrated power—the influence of wealth represented by the Bank of the United States combined with the then-innovative format for organizing economic power, the corporation. The two seemed to conspire against individual enterprise, manipulating economic outcomes with their mysterious paper transactions and using the federal government to enhance their own fortunes.

The key to preserving republican independence was credit. If the control of credit (and money creation) was concentrated in the hands of a few, then all the variety of individual enterprise would be held in thrall by them. On the western frontier, ambitious entrepreneurs and willing bankers were eager to gamble on new projects for development, but they had to turn to the East for financing. Back east, the established wealth holders and their bankers were always more skeptical, having been burned many times by grandiose schemes that failed or by provincial state banks that made loans and issued currency without the required gold reserves to back them up. The banking system, as Galbraith observed, had elastic standards in those times, reflecting the geographic conflict. South and westward, more distant from the eastern Establishment, state banks were less fastidious in their lending practices, more eager to believe in the potential of new ventures. The money-center banks, defenders of the already established wealth, naturally insisted on order. Provincial bank failures were commonplace, confirming the conservative caution of the East. But the looser credit standards on the frontier made possible the great leaps of development—entrepreneurial dreams that came true and bankers who were rewarded handsomely for blind faith. If caution always prevailed, the future might be more orderly and stable, but also stunted, robbed of its full potential.

This difference in perspective formed one of the permanent tensions of American political life—the caution of the money-center interests versus the uninhibited ambition of provincial developers. In modern politics, the regional conflicts became muted as the financial system developed its national scope, but the tension was still present beneath the surface, in a Texas oil boomer’s resentment of big-city bankers, in the Middle West’s paranoia about eastern dominance, in the smalltown banker’s complaints about Fed favoritism toward the largest banks. In the twentieth century, the political conflict took a new form in the arguments over federal credit programs. Who should control access to credit? Who should determine the level of risk taking and the potential of the future? When blocs of citizens or economic interests were turned down by the private financial system or found its terms too stingy, they turned to government as an alternative source of credit—for farm purchases, small-business ventures, home mortgages, business export financing, college tuitions and a long list of other investments. In every instance, the underlying political rationale for government credit subsidies was that the private lending system was wrong. If bankers would not or could not underwrite new ventures that the nation needed, then the government would intervene and dilute their control.

In the Jacksonian era, Biddle’s Bank was the practical arbiter of these questions of credit. The Bank of the United States’s natural posture was in close harmony with the money-center banks, not unlike the Federal Reserve’s a century later and for the same reasons. The Bank shared the same cautious perspective of the largest commercial banks and the same fears that runaway lending and expansion by reckless state banks would eventually lead to calamity, inflation or collapse that could undermine the value of accumulated wealth. In an ultimate sense, the Bank could guide, if not determine, the course of development—which new projects would go forward, which states and localities would be held back, how fast the young nation would be allowed to develop its raw resources.

The popular resentments, in other words, were not the misinformed fears of a backward citizenry. Opposition to the Bank reflected real economic complaints, real questions about the practical dimensions of who held power in a democracy. Historian Marvin Meyers provided an illuminating examination of the struggle in his essay The Jacksonian Persuasion: “. . . when one speaks of the Bank as a symbol of corporate power, monopoly privilege, complex credit economy, and so on . . . the symbolic relationship is more nearly that of the powerful king to his state than that of the flag to the sentiment of loyalty.” The Bank was the symbol, but it was also the reality. As President Jackson said, it was founded on “a distrust of the popular will as a safe regulator of political power.”

Andrew Jackson became an icon for modern liberalism in the Democratic Party because he spoke for the same people—farmers and workers, the industrious middle class—and he challenged concentrated power in the same institutions, banks and corporations. Yet, as his words suggested, the values of Jacksonian Democracy also infused the thinking of many conservatives in the modern Republican Party. They shared his contempt for centralized government, his commitment to the individualism and the free striving of entrepreneurs, his desire to conserve cherished old values that were threatened by a changing society. Election after election, the contest for votes between the major political parties, between liberal and conservative alternatives, was a continuing redefinition of who exactly was to be addressed as the “real people” at the center of American politics and which of those fundamental values were presently important to them.

When Jackson’s “real people” triumphed in 1832 and Biddle’s Bank of the United States was stripped of its powers, the results were so dynamic that both sides could claim their arguments were confirmed by events. Without the Bank’s overarching control of money and credit, a vast boom developed—followed by a surge of inflation and eventually economic contraction. In that sense, the fears of the eastern bankers were dramatically fulfilled. European wealth was lent to develop America and America defaulted massively, many times. Bray Hammond, the Federal Reserve’s own historian, disparaged the results—a promising monetary system was destroyed, state banks were freed from federal control, rampant speculation was encouraged. The consequence, Hammond lamented, was a “reckless, booming anarchy.”

But the Jacksonians were right about America: the country could develop much faster than the cautious bankers of the East had imagined. And it did. A wild economic boom developed, fed by a dizzyingly generous creation of money and credit (created by the banks “more or less out of nothing,” as one economic historian complained). Without Biddle’s Bank to inhibit them, frontier dreamers and land speculators plunged forward hopefully with new schemes, some sound and some outlandish.

The decade of the 1830s, even with its excesses, became a time of extraordinary development—gambles that mostly paid off and permanently advanced the economic structure of the nation. More than three thousand miles of canals were built between 1816 and 1840— about two-thirds during the thirties. The decade produced roughly the same mileage in new railroads. The transportation systems linked markets and, thus, allowed the division of labor to progress to a higher plane, the specialization of production that was the keystone of an efficient capitalist economy. The developing economic markets fueled a spectacular urban boom as towns and cities grew twice as fast as the overall population. In a single decade, the North Central states doubled in population. In 1830, Chicago was a mere dream of land speculators; thirty years later, it was a bustling reality.

“Reckless, booming anarchy,” in short, produced fundamental progress. It was not a stable system, racked as it was with bank failures and collapsed business ventures, outrageous speculation and defaulted loans. Yet it was also energetic and inventive, creating permanent economic growth that endured after the froth had blown away. While some economic historians labored the moot question of how the young economy might have fared if Biddle’s Bank had continued as its financial steward, Marvin Meyers thought the balance between excess and progress clearly favored the Jacksonians and their reckless optimism.

“Those who gambled on the future rise of the public lands in the West,” Meyers explained, “were madmen only in the short-run business sense—only in thinking that future prospects could be realized all at once by means of an infinitely expansible credit system—and not in their basic sense of direction.” The whirlwind creation of credit, wasteful as it was, had the effect of transferring purchasing power from the passive elements in the economy to the activists. “After all the casualties are mourned, the bankrupt enterprises and the bankrupt states, one still sees reason in the improvement madness of the 1830s, and results of unlimited importance,” Meyers concluded.6

The phrase that Fed historian Bray Hammond employed pejoratively—“reckless, booming anarchy”—in fact rang a joyous chord in the American character. It sounded hopeful, creative, free. The “reckless, booming” mentality tempted fate, the risk of inflationary excess and collapse, but it also defied fate, by insisting that positive thinkers could shape their own destinies. It was very American—selfconfident and forward-looking and, on occasion, cocky. This attitude included an assumption about credit that was closely linked to the idea of equality. Some citizens were wealthy and some were not, but the adventurous with acquisitive ambitions should not be held back by those who already had theirs. If credit was the tool for realizing America’s possibilities, then it should be put in the hands of the bold ones who would use it. Americans wanted order and stability; they also wanted endless opportunity and growth.

Economic convictions, though cloaked in theory and data, were nonetheless rooted in one’s personal disposition toward the future. It was these emotions—hope and doubt, ambition and caution—that formed the psychological subtext for every great political debate. Both Republican and Democratic parties contested over the same sentiments, in modern times, changing their economic perspectives as circumstances changed, sometimes even trading identities as one political party became the optimist and the other became the doubter.

For the Jacksonians, the final paradox was this: their political victory led ultimately to defeat for their nostalgic vision of America. The virtuous yeoman Republic that they sought to preserve was, in fact, obliterated by the future they made possible. The impersonal corporations that Jackson despised proved to be the most effective vehicle for organizing the far-flung activities of the emerging national markets. Quite naturally, the national financial system grew with them, developing its own parallel networks to finance the new order. The new roads and canals, the railroads and booming cities, provided the physical infrastructure that was the necessary prerequisite for the rise of corporate capitalism.

“Reckless, booming anarchy” had inadvertently created a new world, and it was this changed economic reality that threatened the next generation of “real people.” Fifty years after Jackson, the Populist farmers on the plains and prairies found themselves encircled by its awesome complexity. Reluctantly, the conservative farmers agreed that they must turn for relief to the one remaining source of alternative power, the federal government.

The “Populist moment,” as Goodwyn called it, was brief. The movement spread furiously for a few years and then, like a prairie fire, burned itself out. Unable to sell its unconventional ideas to either Republicans or Democrats, the Farmers Alliance created the People’s Party and ran its own candidate for President in 1892. The ticket drew more than one million votes, about one of every twelve, and won electoral votes from six states, but that was a long way from attaining real power.

Political realities pushed the agrarian reformers toward fusion with sympathetic Democrats, but the issue on which they united was not the Populists’ imaginative scheme for a new national currency system, but a simple inflationist proposition—free silver. If the government minted new silver coins in abundance, that would expand the money supply and dilute the deflationary power of gold, raise prices and bring relief to the farmers. In 1896, William Jennings Bryan of Nebraska became the presidential nominee of the Democratic Party and also the insurgent People’s Party. Co-opted by the Democrats and the silver issue, the movement’s original agenda was already effectively defeated. When Bryan lost to McKinley in the election of 1896, Populism was finished as a serious threat to the established order.

The indelible memory of the Populist era, the one taught in schoolbooks, was of silver, Bryan and his famous “cross of gold” speech. But, as Goodwyn explained in The Populist Moment, these images grossly distorted the real experience and concealed the substantive core of Populist thinking. Bryan was a late convert who made himself leader of an army that was already marching; his “free silver” platform was shallow, even reactionary, compared with the far more radical plan that Populist thinkers had devised.

In 1889, they had proposed a new monetary system for the nation that would create money “in the name of the whole people,” that would ensure ample credit for productive enterprises and free producers from the control of commercial bankers. Called the “sub-treasury plan,” it was calculated to use the pure credit inherent in the sovereign national government to finance directly the productive efforts of the most humble citizens—a democratic money system, in other words, that was much too radical for the American system, then or now.

The Populists’ bold concept evolved, a step at a time, from experience and practical frustration. From the beginning, the heart of the Alliance movement was the formation of farmer cooperatives as the way to escape the deflationary squeeze of tight money and the demands of usurious lenders. The cooperatives would buy the farmers’ cotton or corn, store it in cooperative warehouses and then resell it at optimum prices, thus protecting individual farmers from the harrowing losses of a glutted marketplace. The cooperatives also served as purchasing and credit collectives, buying supplies at wholesale and selling them to farmers at low interest rates, insulating them from the ruinous interest rates demanded by merchants. Through cooperative action, the angry farmers believed, they would win back their independence.

The largest and most ambitious cooperative was the statewide Texas Exchange and it was also the first to fail. The problem was access to credit—the carry-over financing that the cooperative needed to stretch from planting to harvest, to pay farmers for their cotton before it could be marketed. To raise its own capital, the Texas Exchange sold stock shares to the impoverished farm families at $2 per capita and collected more than $20,000. For collateral, the cooperative made an extraordinary request of its landowning members: they were asked to put up title to their own farms as security so the cooperative could borrow the funds to purchase supplies and extend crop loans to all its members, including the landless sharecroppers. By the spring of 1888, the Texas Exchange had collected more than $200,000 in collateral, the notes pledged on land and livestock by Texas farmers. With that secure base, the exchange managers confidently went ahead and ordered $108,000 in supplies for the growing season.

But the bankers refused to lend. When Charles W. Macune, business manager for the Texas Exchange, tried to borrow the working capital, he was turned down. He went to bankers in Dallas, Houston, Fort Worth, Galveston and New Orleans, but they refused to advance operating credit in exchange for the farmers’ notes. The best he could get was a $6,000 loan in Houston for which the lender demanded $20,000 in farm notes as collateral. Macune concluded that “all those who controlled the moneyed institutions of the state either did not choose to do business with us, or they feared the ill will of a certain class of businessmen who considered their interests antagonistic to those of our order.”

The Texas Exchange was suddenly in crisis, unable to borrow or to pay for the supplies it had ordered from wholesalers. It survived, but barely, through a dramatic fund-raising campaign across the state in which farmers put up another $80,000 to save their cooperative venture. The following year, frozen out again by the private banking system, the Texas Exchange went under.

Macune, who was trained as both doctor and lawyer, became a self-taught economist, studying the theories of money and credit, searching for a plausible solution. The cooperatives were doomed, he recognized, unless there was a fundamental change in the lending system. Texas Populists had already declared for fundamental money reforms in their Cleburne Demands of 1886: to halt the price deflation, the nation must abandon the gold standard and move to a fiat currency of Treasury notes, a flexible money supply that would respond to seasonal surges in the demand for credit. Those concepts were already too advanced for the elites who dominated banking and politics; now Macune leaped further beyond them into the realm of government-supplied credit.

At the St. Louis Alliance convention in 1889, Macune unveiled his radical plan for money: the U.S. Treasury would establish federal warehouses and grain elevators in every county with significant agricultural production, and these thousands of “sub-treasuries” would serve as the valves for money creation. A farmer would put his corn or cotton in storage at the sub-treasury and then could borrow against his crops at a 1 or 2 percent rate or he could sell the crops at prevailing market prices or borrow on the value of his land. The farmer would be paid in legal tender, the greenback dollars printed by the government as the new national currency, or in negotiable certificates of deposit that could be used in trade. The government, thus, would be creating new money and putting it into circulation via the loans made to farmers—a money supply that would be based on real production, the tangible goods in storage. In theory, when farmers repaid their loans, the currency would be paid back into the Treasury and extinguished, withdrawn from the circulating money supply—much as the Federal Reserve System creates and destroys money through the medium of bank reserves and bank lending.

The difference, however, is crucial: the Populist plan essentially would employ the full faith and credit of the United States government directly to assist the “producing classes” who needed financing for their enterprises. In effect, it would circumvent the bankers and provide credit straight to the users, particularly the small farmers who needed it most, who were most vulnerable to the demands of the private credit system. The government would provide “money at cost,” instead of money lent by merchants and bankers at 35 or 50 or 100 percent interest.

The money-creation system that was adopted in 1913, instead, preserved the banking system as the intermediary that controlled the distribution of new money and credit. When the Fed expanded the money supply, commercial bankers decided who would get to use it and also how much it would cost. The Federal Reserve never interfered in those decisions, despite its occasional pleas to the banking system to favor certain kinds of borrowers or to avoid others. In that sense, the Fed shrank from the full implications of its power and, instead, delegated the allocation of new credit to private interests.

The first consequence of the Populist scheme, if it had been adopted, would have been a dismantling of the old order, the hierarchical control implicit in the private credit system and also the regional conflicts between eastern money and provincial development. In terms of the money mechanics, the Populist solution seemed to reverse what the Jacksonians had wanted. The Populists wanted to abandon gold and create a central bank, exactly the opposite of Andrew Jackson’s agenda. Yet, despite the policy differences, both movements spoke for the same aspirations, the same classes of Americans. Democracy, they insisted, required a democratic money system —one that dispersed economic power on a broadly democratic plane, that decentralized the control of credit and gave a free run to the natural economic energies that would spread the opportunities and incomes as widely as possible. The “real people” would be enhanced; the power of wealth holders would be diminished.

The second consequence, just as dramatic, would have been the abrupt reversal of falling prices—an explosive surge of inflation that would have restored prosperity for agricultural producers. The purpose of the land loans, in particular, was to expand the money supply to about $50 in circulating currency per capita—roughly the same per capita money supply that existed during the Civil War. Higher prices would have swiftly followed, doubling and tripling, with the same egalitarian consequences that usually accompanied inflation. In each and every instance, inflation was a political phenomenon—a decision to serve the many over the few.

It was the road not taken. The New York Times, reflecting conventional wisdom of the era, denounced the Populist plan as “one of the wildest and most fantastic projects ever seriously proposed by sober man.” Yet John Maynard Keynes later saluted these self-taught agrarians as “a brave army of heretics,” for Keynes recognized that their economic analysis anticipated his own. Many decades later, William P. Yohe, a monetary economist at Duke University, analyzed the subtreasury scheme and concluded that, despite some flaws, it would have worked more or less as intended—forcing up prices, distributing new wealth more broadly and grossly stimulating the national economy.7

For some years, Populist congressmen introduced legislative versions of Macune’s original concept, but most mainstream politicians and economists dismissed the Populists as irresponsible cranks (one economist who did not was Richard T. Ely, founder of the American Economic Association). Fifty years later, during the Great Depression, the price-stabilization aspects of Macune’s sub-treasury plan were incorporated in the New Deal farm programs—government purchasing and storage of crops, accompanied by subsidized credit for farmers. But the concept was stripped of its deeper implications—the reform of money.

The struggling farmers eventually won relief from the devastating deflation, but by a fluke of history. In the late 1890s, prices stopped falling and started rising smartly again, a steady inflation that lasted for twenty years and restored prosperity to the agricultural producers. The cause had nothing to do with politics or government policy. It was caused by a surge in the supply of gold—new gold fields discovered and developed in Alaska, Colorado and South Africa that doubled the world’s stock of gold between 1890 and 1914.

The central element of the Populist plan, a democratized monetary system, was much too radical to be seriously pursued by later generations of reformers. At its core, the plan was an audacious redefinition of money—money was a contract with the future, not an obligation to the past. A free society could determine that contract for itself, in a democratic manner, and fulfill its terms, independent of the demands imposed by the old wealth accumulated from past enterprises. In short, the national government could create money and invest it with a social purpose—promoting greater equality—because the government was the ultimate guarantor of the future. The new money created by government, the Populists reasoned, would be free (save for the costs of printing and handling), yet valuable. Where did its value come from? From everyone—from the mutual consent given by all, and so all should share in its power.

Nearly a century later, “populist” distempers would still echo regularly through American politics, but the core ideas were moribund and the Populist label was randomly claimed with dubious legitimacy. In an especially perverse twist, some discontented Americans who called themselves “populist” campaigned earnestly for a return to the gold standard. Most were middle-class businessmen or professionals, doctors and dentists and ranchers, who were deeply alienated from the governing elites of both Wall Street and Washington. In that cultural sense, they were authentically “of the people.” But, in economic terms, they were on the other side of the money question—minor members of the creditor class distressed by inflation. The fact that The Wall Street Journal championed this “populist” cause ought to have suggested which interests expected to benefit from the restoration of gold. On the whole, they were the same interests that had defeated the original Populists.8

To complete the ironic symmetry, one genuine legatee of the Populist thinking was himself a wealthy investment banker. Louis O. Kelso, a San Francisco banker with libertarian values, tirelessly promoted a modern equivalent of the sub-treasury plan that he had devised—a money-and-credit system that would use the central bank to distribute the ownership of new capital democratically and, thus, restore the economic autonomy that so many had lost. If everyone owned capital, each would be more free—less dependent on both concentrated wealth and the liberal welfare state. Kelso’s vision resonated with the same principles (and the same distrusts) that had motivated the original Populism, but his mechanics were adapted to the terms of corporate capitalism. Owning stock had replaced owning farmland as the primary source of wealth and independence, but access to credit was still the heart of the matter.

Despite years of derision from conventional economists, Kelso’s invention—employee-owned trusts that held stock in corporations (better known as ESOPs)—was gradually spreading in use, especially among thousands of smaller or embattled companies. But few politicians or policy analysts would listen seriously to Kelso’s more radical proposition: the Federal Reserve’s money-creation powers could be harnessed directly to the need for new capital, channeling low-interest credit to new enterprises, provided that the stock ownership of these companies was distributed broadly among workers and communities, indeed to all citizens. Instead of only buying government securities when it created money, the Fed would also buy the debt paper of employee-owned or community-owned trusts, which financed new capital formation. When the new ventures paid off the debts on their new machines and factories, the loan paper would be retired and ordinary citizens would hold title to the new capital stock. Over a generation or longer, without confiscating or nationalizing anyone’s property, the ownership of wealth would become more broadly distributed.

Kelso’s plan envisioned essentially the same money process that Macune and the others had espoused a century before: by gaining access to capital credit, people would have access to owning wealth. Kelso would encounter the same hostilities, the same objections. Like the sub-treasury plan, there was no technical reason why Kelso’s scheme (or at least a modest version) could not be made to work compatibly with the Fed’s other obligation to control the expansion of money and credit. But there were many political reasons. He was offering a new version of the political choice that American politics had always refused to make.9

The Populists had an expansive conception of democracy’s possibilities that, from the perspective of the late twentieth century, seemed grandly innocent. Certainly, it was too much for their contemporaries. It was radical enough to abandon gold and silver, the ancient guarantees of money’s value, and to entrust the management of money to mere mortals. To go the next step and allow democratic aspirations to shape the money process seemed recklessly idealistic. Popular desires, it was said, would inevitably outstrip realistic prospects and debase the currency, and politics would corrupt the decisions. Accumulated capital—and the political power it embodied—would be the permanent hostage of democracy.

In the American system, it was decided, the people could not be trusted with these questions. Some issues, it seemed, were too important to be decided by democratic process. The Populist vision was rejected and history chose a different alternative. When the Federal Reserve was created in 1913, purposely insulated from the hot breath of politics, the new institution effectively defined the permanent limits of American democracy.





