9 THE GREAT COMPROMISE


The house of Morgan towered above the pedestrian ranks of American finance and business like a great baronial castle, dreadful in its feudal power but also admirable in its way.

The “money trust,” as The Wall Street Journal insisted in a 1912 editorial, was really just another name for J. Pierpont Morgan. Morgan himself was the prototypal financier whose image lived on as the American caricature of the tycoon—an austere patrician, balding, with a gray walrus moustache, wing collar and cravat, a gold watch chain across his vest. As the object of intense public hatred, he was serenely indifferent to the howls of the mob. In his own world, J. P. Morgan was regarded as something of a hero.

The Morgan banks could execute dazzling and ruthless manipulations in the stock market—cornering, crushing, swallowing their corporate prey. At the same time, Morgan was the ultimate guarantor of stability and order in the banking system, the man whom other bankers turned to in distress. With a few confident strokes, it was said, J. P. Morgan could stop bank panics. Some critics were convinced that he also started them.

Morgan was among those masterminds of capital—men like Rockefeller, Harriman, Du Pont and others—who organized the new century. They saw the emerging shape of things and moved boldly to seize control. It was not a pretty struggle, and in their own time, these men were denounced for greed, power lust and a brutal indifference to human suffering. But they invented the structure of industrial production that would dominate American commerce in the twentieth century—consolidating whole sectors into mammoth corporate organizations with names like Standard Oil, AT&T, U.S. Steel and General Motors. In social influence, they were America’s closest approximation of European royalty. .

As the banker of bankers, Morgan also assumed a mantle of noblesse oblige. When the banking system was swept with panic and illiquidity, it was Morgan who organized the loan syndicates among major banks that came to the rescue. Morgan and his men made the choices about which banks would be saved and which ones allowed to fail, a function that won limited gratitude from the survivors (since they paid dearly for the assistance) and lasting enmity from the doomed. At his zenith, J. P. Morgan was so powerful that even the federal government came to him for help and he agreed to save it from impending financial ruin. Naturally, he was hated. He was also indispensable.

The condition that has developed in Wall Street in the past fifteen years is to a considerable extent a personal one [the Journal editorial explained], and the authority which centers in the hands of Mr. Morgan, a man seventy-five years of age, is by no means something which can be passed down to his successors. Such men have no successors; and their work is either left undone after they are dead or the world devises other means and other works to take its place. There were no successors to Napoleon, Bismarck, Cecil Rhodes or E. H. Harriman, and their authority was not perpetuated.1

The commentary seemed prescient. By the following year, 1913, J. P. Morgan was dead, and on November 16, 1914, the Federal Reserve opened its doors and effectively replaced him by “other means.” The mantle of Morgan’s private authority was inherited by the Fed— and also his sense of noblesse oblige. Morgan’s informal stewardship was formalized in law and depersonalized as a remote agency of government. While many citizens would continue to rail at the mysterious powers of the Fed, it was, on the whole, more difficult to blame an institution than an individual. The public wrath directed at the handful of bankers associated with the “money trust” was much harder to sustain once the object of attack was a faceless bureaucracy.

The paternalistic attitude that would permeate the Federal Reserve as an institution reflected the same sense of exalted public mission felt by the “Morgan men.” Indeed, the two institutions would remain intimate through future decades, so much so that Morgan Guaranty became known informally as the “Fed bank.”2 One was private and the other was public, but they thought alike. Outsiders were rankled by the aristocratic clubbiness. Inside the Fed, it was regarded as a legacy of honor.

The Federal Reserve System would not, of course, continue Morgan’s brutal stock-market forays for the control of private corporations or the aggressive profit taking that had caused so much resentment. But the Fed did assume his place as the castle, overseeing the fields of finance. Like Morgan, the Federal Reserve would be the ultimate defender of stability, with the power to protect and also, implicitly, to destroy. And officers of the Federal Reserve would fully understand, as J. P. Morgan had, that they would not be loved for their efforts.

Sometimes in human events, momentous decisions were driven by the wrong question and based on mistaken answers. Was there really a “money trust” that controlled everything? The idea that a Wall Street financial monopoly had gained a stranglehold on the American economy absorbed the nation in 1912, stimulated by two decades of bewildering financial turbulence and brutal corporate consolidations. People wanted explanations. A sensational investigation conducted by a House banking subcommittee early that year seemed to reveal them. Twelve banks in New York, Boston and Chicago, the investigators found, held a total of 746 interlocking directorships in 134 corporations —railroads, insurance, manufacturing, public utilities, trading companies, other banks.

The implications were frightening. The public’s alarm provided the necessary political steam that led to reform of the nation’s money system, the legislation enacted in 1913 to create the Federal Reserve System. As a matter of cold logic, however, the solution did not answer the popular discontents surrounding the “money trust.” Whether by accident or design, the Fed may have actually preserved the financial power of those very bankers who the public thought were at last being brought under control. Great moments in history were often surrounded by a confusion of purposes.

Representative Robert L. Henry of Texas, one of the last genuine Populists to serve in Congress, summarized the evidence from the congressional investigation:

It is sufficient to say that, during the last five years, the financial resources of the country have been concentrated in the city of New York, until they now dominate more than 75 percent of the moneyed interests of America, more than 75 percent of the industrial corporations which are combined in the trusts, and practically all of the great trunk railways running from ocean to ocean; until these great forces are in such combination and agreement that it is well-nigh impossible for honest competition to be set up against them.

The popular sense of conspiracy was greatly enhanced when George McC. Reynolds, president of the Continental Bank of Chicago, the largest outside New York, testified before the House investigation. “The money power now lies in the hands of a dozen men, of whom I plead guilty to being one,” Reynolds confessed. But when J. P. Morgan himself was called to testify, he dismissed the talk of a “money trust” as nonsense. “All the banks in Christendom could not control money,” Morgan insisted. “There could be no ‘money trust.’”

Morgan was essentially correct—or at least closer to the reality than the melodramatic accusations against him. Contrary to what the public and congressional reformers believed, the problem was not that a few well-placed tycoons were in control of the nation’s money system. The problem was that no one was in control of it. As the leading bankers of Wall Street appreciated, the United States must now at last devise what its citizens had so long resisted—a central bank, invested with the authority of government, to manage money and credit.

In the decade after 1900, as the Populist revolt faded, bankers replaced farmers as the leading voices for monetary reform. For the distressed farmers, the money question had been primarily a complaint about prices. Their central grievance had been alleviated in the late 1890s when a sudden surge in the world’s supply of gold from the Yukon and South Africa had produced a prosperous era of rising prices. But the money question always had a parallel component to it —the issue of instability in the banking system caused by the inflexibility of money and credit. This was the concern that persuaded nervous bankers of the East and industrial Midwest that the system must be altered. With considerably more political clout at their disposal, the bankers picked up the cause that western and southern farmers had futilely championed and refashioned the reform goals to coincide with their own interests. Not surprisingly, the bankers neglected to acknowledge any intellectual debt to the agrarian agitators whose wild proposals they had denounced only a few years earlier.

For two decades, the banking system was shaken by periodic tremors, the panic in 1893 and again in 1895 and, most severely, the panic of 1907, which even closed an important bank in New York City. The troubles usually started with seasonal surges in the demand for agricultural credit. Across the country, the thousands of nationally chartered country banks were required to maintain their reserves on deposit at larger banks in forty-seven “reserve cities,” and these reserve banks, in turn, kept their reserves at the largest banks in the three “central reserve cities” (principally New York but also Chicago and St. Louis). In theory, the nation’s total supply of reserves was ample enough to support the periodic surges in lending, but in practice, the reserves were spread out widely and in the wrong places— immobile money that could not be quickly redirected to where it was needed.

When the autumn demand for loans increased, the country banks drew down their reserve cash on deposit in the forty-seven reserve cities, and the reserve banks, in order to restore their own depleted balances, would have to withdraw funds from the three central reserve cities. If lending continued to expand in the countryside, the pressure to supply more reserves intensified in New York—“much like a whip, where a little force at one end produced a tremendous force at the other,” as historian Roger T. Johnson put it.3

New York banks held vast fortunes in their vaults, and up to a point, Morgan and the others could satisfy the expanding demand, perhaps raising their rates in order to discourage further lending. When pressed, they could organize far-flung loan syndicates, mobilizing the idle reserves on deposit at many scattered banks. If they had enough time, they could turn to London or Paris and borrow more gold from Europe, permitting the money supply to expand and re-lending the new funds to the American banks that were in need.

When all these contingencies failed, a panic began. New York would begin saying no to the next requests and somewhere in America banks would begin to fail, unable to meet loan commitments or to honor their depositors* withdrawals. When the word of a bank failure spread, depositors everywhere panicked—rushed to their banks and demanded their money. These “runs” multiplied the crisis many times, often toppling otherwise solvent institutions that did not have enough cash on hand to pay out all their checking deposits. As failures cascaded through the system, closing large and small banks almost randomly, many innocent people lost their savings and, without credit, normal commerce was frozen. Deep recessions accompanied the money crisis, collapsing prices and “smashing” the financial markets.

Given the pivotal role of Wall Street bankers (and the accompanying spectacle of their stock-market manipulations), it was natural that people blamed them for these waves of destruction. In a narrow sense. Wall Street financiers did decide when banks would fail and which favored banks would be saved. When panic struck, Wall Street financiers did take advantage of the collapsing financial markets to enhance their own profits and gobble up corporations. The monetary problems were more systemic, however, than mere greed. Imperious bankers of the East may have been as wicked as the people of Texas or Iowa believed, but they were not what caused the recurring crisis.

Two rigidities interacted to create waves of panic: the immobile reserves, scattered too thinly around the country to be redirected quickly to the banks that needed them, and the inflexible money supply tied to gold, unable to expand fast enough to supply seasonal surges in bank lending. These problems were compounded by the public’s lingering distrust of account-book money, existing only as a number in a checking deposit (even though by then Americans held $6 in demand-deposit money for every $1 they held in cash). In troubled times, people wanted to have their money in real dollar bills they could see and touch and put under the mattress until the panic ended. So they rushed to the banks.

In 1894, when Populist orators still were pushing the sub-treasury plan and free silver, the American Bankers Association proposed the first version of what bankers regarded as reform—a new national currency, unconditionally guaranteed by the federal government, distributed by commercial banks. The following year, another devastating panic swept the country. It took fifteen more years of debate and crisis before solutions emerged.

As the Populist unrest approached its crest, nervous investors feared that either hyperinflation or even political revolution would wipe out their assets. In 1895, they began fleeing from the American system, withdrawing their wealth from U.S. financial assets, demanding gold and shifting it to Europe. The federal government’s own gold reserve was drained so rapidly that it was threatened with depletion. The desperate Treasury turned to J. P. Morgan. He organized a syndicate of bankers and they bailed out the U.S. government with a loan of 3.5 million ounces of gold.

A dozen years later, the bailout was reversed. Morgan and his allies not only failed to contain the panic of 1907, but they were compelled to seek help from Washington. The bank crisis that unfolded that autumn was different—it struck Wall Street itself. The Knickerbocker Trust Company, third largest in New York City, was forced into sudden bankruptcy and two others were driven to the brink. Morgan organized a money pool of $25 million for emergency loans, then another $10 million the next day. But as he tried to contain the Wall Street crisis, alarm rippled across the country. Provincial banks rushed to draw down their reserves, anticipating that dreadful moment when New York would cut them off. The self-protective hoarding of reserves only added to the pressures. Cumulatively, it was more than Morgan and his men could handle.

The Treasury in Washington did what it could to help (prompted in part by Morgan’s personal plea to President Theodore Roosevelt). Treasury responded much the way a central bank would react—by pumping liquidity into the banking system. As the crisis threatened in September, the government shifted millions of dollars in federal funds to deposits at commercial banks around the nation and tried to limit government withdrawals. On October 24, the day after the Knickerbocker failure, Washington rushed $25 million to the major New York banks—technically a deposit but effectively an interest-free emergency loan. The bankers could lend out the new funds to whoever was threatened with insolvency (and also collect interest on the loans). In all, the government provided nearly $38 million for New York alone. In November, by presidential order, the Treasury issued $150 million in low-interest bonds and certificates and permitted the banks to use the government securities as collateral for creating new currency—an expedient device for pumping up the money supply in a hurry. The crisis subsided, but the economic effects were again ruinous.

The 1907 trauma convinced Wall Street. The financial system and even the banks’ own security could no longer depend on the good offices of a few titans like Morgan. Money reform became not just an interesting ideal but a practical necessity. From that point on, the major banks and financiers applied their political influence to achieving it. Historian Gabriel Kolko described the watershed:

The panic of 1907 was an indication of the extent to which the ability to control crises had moved out of the hands of the New York bankers. If it was merely a question of raising $50 million in a healthy European financial market, as in 1895, Morgan would have been able to handle the task. But the American economy, and the scale of its needs, had grown tremendously, and it was as much affected by conditions outside New York as in the city itself. By 1907, Morgan, Stillman (of the Rockefeller bank) and other key leaders of finance were old men, and the strain of the situation was more than they could bear financially or psychologically.4

The old order was failing. Villainous Wall Street was actually losing its dominant position over American finance. A Treasury Department study in 1913 quantified the diffusion of financial power that was occurring as industrial capitalism dispersed its enterprises across the nation. Despite the periodic banking disasters, the number of banks in the United States increased two and a half times from 1900 to 1912 (roughly from ten thousand to twenty-five thousand), nearly twice as fast as the population. Most of the growth, naturally, was far distant from New York. During these twelve years, the percentage increase in banking capital and deposits was two to four times greater in the West and the South than it was in the East.5

There was a good reason why financial power was becoming less centralized. As Kolko noted, ascendant industrial corporations increasingly decided that they could finance their expansion projects from their own growing profits, instead of borrowing the capital from investment bankers. From 1900 to 1910, he found, 70 percent of the new funds for manufacturing were generated internally, making the corporations more independent of finance capital, not more ensnared, as the banks’ critics believed. As new companies prospered without Wall Street, so did the new regional banks that handled their funds. New York’s concentrated share of bank deposits was still huge, about half of the nation’s total, but it was declining steadily. Wall Street was still “the biggest kid on the block,” but less and less able to bully the others.

This trend was a crucial fact of history, a misunderstood reality that completely alters the political meaning of the reform legislation that created the Federal Reserve. At the time, the conventional wisdom in Congress, widely shared and sincerely espoused by Progressive reformers, was that a government institution would finally harness the “money trust,” disarm its powers, and establish broad democratic control over money and credit (this version became the historian’s standard interpretation). As Kolko’s reinterpretation argued and the facts would subsequently demonstrate, the results were nearly the opposite. The money reforms enacted in 1913, in fact, helped to preserve the status quo, to stabilize the old order. Money-center bankers would not only gain dominance over the new central bank, but would also enjoy new insulation against instability and their own decline. Once the Fed was in operation, the steady diffusion of financial power halted. Wall Street maintained its dominant position—and even enhanced it—until the trauma of 1929.

When Woodrow Wilson accepted the Democratic presidential nomination in the summer of 1912, his acceptance speech mildly restated the passionate grievances that western and southern Democrats held against the “money trust.” “Vast confederacies” had formed among banks and corporations, Wilson agreed, neither illegal nor conspiratorial, but still disturbing. “A concentration of the control of credit . . . may at any time become infinitely dangerous to free enterprise,” he acknowledged.

The new Democratic leader, a historian from Virginia, formerly president of Princeton University, was clearly more conservative on the money question than major elements in his own party. Three times the angry provincial Democrats had given their party’s nomination to William Jennings Bryan, the Nebraska Populist, and despite his defeats Bryan was still their putative leader. In contrast, Woodrow Wilson had a few years earlier praised the leadership of J. P. Morgan. Wilson also spoke positively about the rise of vast corporations. “The old time of individual competition is probably gone by,” he observed. “It may come back; I don’t know; it will not come back within our time, I dare say.”

As a candidate, Wilson stiffened his rhetoric to reassure his fellow Democrats and took leadership of a political party that was resurgent after nearly two decades of minority status. In 1910, the Democrats had regained control of the House and, among other things, succeeded in blocking the Republicans’ major proposal for banking reform, a measure introduced by the patrician senator from Rhode Island, Nelson Aldrich.

The Aldrich plan, it was said, was hatched at an infamous secret meeting at Jekyll Island, an isolated retreat in Georgia where key leaders of Wall Street finance met clandestinely in 1910 to settle on the terms for reform. The Jekyll Island meeting, which became a staple in the conspiracy theories surrounding the Fed, included Frank A. Vanderlip of National City (now Citibank), Henry P. Davison from the Morgan bank and Paul Warburg of the Kuhn, Loeb investment house.

The conspiracy-minded critics exaggerated the importance of the Jekyll Island meeting, since it was hardly a secret that Wall Street wanted reform. But their suspicions were poetically accurate—the bankers met secretly because they knew that any proposal identified as Wall Street’s bill would be doomed in the Democratic House of Representatives. The plan worked out by the group did, in fact, become a prototype for the final legislation: creation of a National Reserve Association with fifteen major regions, controlled by a board of commercial bankers but empowered by the federal government to act like a central bank—creating money and lending reserves to private banks. Aside from details, the same fundamentals were to be incorporated in the new central bank. Idle reserves would be consolidated in strategic locations where they could be deployed swiftly to banks that were temporarily illiquid. An “elastic currency” that could grow or shrink in response to credit demands would let the money supply adjust to the changing needs of commerce. A new national currency (eventually called Federal Reserve Notes) would be automatically interchangeable with demand deposits, extinguishing the lingering popular suspicions of checking. Together, these reforms were designed to eliminate the rigidities that had produced perennial crisis.

Once elected, Woodrow Wilson moderated his rhetoric, and instead of consulting Bryan’s agrarian wing, he turned for his ideas on bank reform to those who were already quite close to the bankers’ perspective. A historical account published by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston described the new President’s shift with evident approval: “It was probably a combination of political realities and his own lack of knowledge about banking and finance that caused Wilson to reflect many of Bryan’s views, but after his election to the Presidency, Wilson relied on others for more expert advice on the currency question.”

One of the experts was H. Parker Willis, an economist on the House Banking Committee staff who fifteen years earlier had served on a private commission supported by large banks to promote an early version of monetary reform. The bill drafted by Willis and his boss, Representative Carter Glass of Virginia, differed in detail but not in fundamentals from the Aldrich plan: a privately controlled network of regional reserve banks that would be given government powers.

The President accepted their outline, but insisted on one crucial change—a Federal Reserve Board in Washington, appointed by the President, would be added to control and coordinate among the regions. This was to be the “capstone” that would represent the public interest alongside the bankers. Bankers would run the twelve Reserve Banks, and as consolation for being excluded from the central board, they would send their representatives to the Federal Advisory Council that would meet regularly with the Federal Reserve Board to advise it on money issues.

The Secretary of the Treasury and the Comptroller of the Currency would serve on the seven-member board in Washington, guaranteeing a direct voice for the Chief Executive in the making of monetary policy. With that alteration, Wilson explained, the elected government could control the new system—“so that the banks may be the instruments, not the masters, of business and of individual enterprise and initiative.”

It was Wilson’s great compromise—creating a hybrid institution that mixed private and public control, an approach without precedent at the time. Louis D. Brandeis, the brilliant lawyer and reformer, advised Wilson that the bankers should be excluded entirely from control of the system. “The conflict between the policies of the Administration and the desires of the financiers and of big business is an irreconcilable one,” Brandeis warned. “Concessions to the big-business interests must in the end prove futile.”

Wilson’s conviction that he had struck the right moderate balance seemed confirmed, however, by the reactions to his legislation. It was attacked by both extremes—the “radicals” from the Populist states and the bankers in Wall Street and elsewhere. The bankers feared a dangerous precedent for government control over the private economy. The remnant Populists complained that Wilson’s approach did not give the government enough control. Both critiques proved to be correct.

With a few cosmetic changes, the President persuaded Bryan, whom he had appointed Secretary of State, to endorse the measure as a triumph over the “money trust.” But other Populists were not taken in. Representative Joe H. Eagle of Texas accurately perceived the economic benefits for banks—they were “to be guaranteed against loss by the establishment of a paternalistic relationship or private partnership with the government.” Congressman Robert Henry of Texas, most perceptive of the Populist legislators, described the political balance in Wilson’s legislation as “wholly in the interest of the creditor classes, the banking fraternity, and the commercial world, without proper provision for the debtor classes and those who toil, produce and sustain the country.”

The most relentless opposition, however, came from bankers. It was a Democratic bill and most of them were Republicans. The New York Times derided Wilson’s proposal as the “Oklahoma idea, the Nebraska idea.” The New York Sun, then the reliable voice of Wall Street sentiment, dismissed the President’s cautious compromise as “covered all over with the slime of Bryanism.”

As traditional conservatives, many bankers were still not reconciled to the abandonment of laissez-faire economics. If government was given a role in finance, they foresaw (correctly) that a creeping process of government intrusion would be legitimized and eventually other aspects of the private economy would be politicized. Moreover, the basic idea behind establishing numerous regional banks was to avoid centralization and dominance by either Washington or the eastern money centers (an essential assurance to placate smaller provincial banks, which were themselves wary of Wall Street power). Some bankers opposed the idea of any central board at all. Others insisted that if there was to be one, its members must be appointed by them, not by politicians.

Through 1913, as the legislation worked its way toward enactment, banking leaders argued these points, offered alternatives and condemned the Administration’s bill in the harshest terms. The bankers failed to defeat Wilson’s design, but their opposition left the indelible impression that when the Federal Reserve Act was signed into law two days before Christmas, it was a great victory for Democratic reform over Republican special interests, a triumph for the popular will and defeat for Wall Street.

The reality was more ambiguous, as Gabriel Kolko documented from the private correspondence and public comments of prominent bankers. While banking organizations were adopting resolutions against the measure, many bankers were also writing their senators urging them to vote for it, rather than allow reform to die. They denounced Wilson’s “obnoxious” contributions to the bill, but were “extremely favorable to about 80 percent of it,” as one of them put it. When the law was enacted, opponents like Paul Warburg swiftly put aside their complaints and agreed to help run the new system.

“For years bankers have been almost the sole advocates of just this sort of legislation that it is now hoped we will have,” Frank Vanderlip of National City told an assembly of New York bankers, “and it is unfair to accuse them of being in opposition to sound legislation.”

In fact, they were not opposed to the general scheme, only to certain particulars. The banking interests lost their battle to gain full private control over the new Federal Reserve System, but they won the larger struggle to create a money system that would rely upon the commercial banks as its operating partners.

Ultimately, the question of who really won and who lost in Woodrow Wilson’s compromise would be answered most persuasively by the subsequent performance and politics of the new central bank. If the money-center banks were truly defeated in 1913, then why did they become so loyal and supportive toward the institution that Wilson had created? If the Federal Reserve was the public master created to control Wall Street, then why did the Fed turn always for political protection not to labor or farmers or small business but to the largest and most influential bankers?

In partisan terms, the Federal Reserve was derived from mixed parentage—inspired by both Republican and Democratic objectives. This helped to explain why the basic terms worked out in 1913 would endure unaltered for many decades afterward. The original idea had started as a conservative reform, sought by Republican interests, but the final design was modified by a Democratic President and a Democratic Congress, imposing a governmental presence on private finance.

This melding of interests gave the Fed a unique posture in American politics, artfully balanced between the two parties and effectively insulated from both of them. Whenever it was threatened from left or right, the central bank would turn to the opposite side for help in blunting the attack. In the same manner, as Fed lobbyists cheerfully acknowledged, the central bank learned to frustrate the occasional challenges from either Congress or the executive branch by playing one off against the other. When the Fed wanted legislation to expand its powers, it turned to Democrats. When its independence was threatened by liberal reformers, it turned to the conservatives of both parties, the natural majority in Congress, to defend it. Wilson’s grand compromise had created a kind of permanent stalemate.

As an instrument of government, however, the Federal Reserve’s lineage was clearly an institution of the Democratic Party, not the Republican. That seemed to contradict the political stereotypes surrounding it, since Democratic liberals often attacked the Fed for high interest rates and Republican conservatives usually rallied around when the Fed imposed a hard-money policy. But, historically. Democrats invented and nurtured the Fed. During sixty-seven years, there were only three important occasions when the Federal Reserve was established or altered by Congress—the original act of 1913, the 1935 reforms that centralized policy control in Washington and the 1980 Monetary Control Act that gave the Fed universal control over reserves of private banks. In all three instances, the legislation was proposed and enacted by Democrats.

The Federal Reserve was. more profoundly, an important prototype for the modern liberal state. For the first time, a governing arrangement would explicitly mix public and private interests in a manner that was elaborated many times later in different ways. However inadvertently or reluctantly, the creation of the central bank committed the federal government to a direct role in managing the private economy, and, once involved, it could no longer pretend to be aloof. It was, in fact, the beginning of the end of laissez-faire.

The Fed would pursue large public objectives, but it would also serve private economic interests. It was exactly the mixture of purposes—protecting private profit and the public interest at the same time—that was the hallmark of modern liberal institutions. Later on, it became commonplace in the national government as liberals intervened to protect or stabilize other economic sectors, from agriculture and oil to communications and labor unions. The basic terms of debate from 1913—laissez-faire conservativism versus liberal intervention— would echo again and again through subsequent economic issues, but the political choice had already been made and future debates would nearly always be settled in a similar manner.

The Federal Reserve, tradition decided, was to be “independent” of politics. The word itself appeared nowhere in the Federal Reserve Act, but both parties accepted the self-imposed limitations on their own power. These were the terms of truce under which democratic capitalism would function in the twentieth century, suppressing the class arguments that had dominated politics in previous generations.

As Carter Glass promised in the debate, the Fed was to be an “altruistic institution ... a distinctly nonpartisan organization whose functions are to be wholly divorced from politics.” Federal Reserve Board members were given ten-year terms (later lengthened to fourteen years) to insulate them from crass partisan pressures. The mechanics of how the Fed would coordinate its economic policy with the rest of the government’s was left deliberately murky. The management of money was presumed to be a technical matter, best sequestered from politics.

One promise was not kept: Carter Glass assured his congressional colleagues that the Federal Reserve Board would operate under “the X-ray of publicity” so that there “can be nothing sinister about its transactions.” Instead, the money question receded from political debate and became submerged in a new managerial complexity. When the Federal Reserve was created, the realm of acceptable political discourse shrank.

The competing political claims surrounding money and credit did not, of course, disappear from real life, but only from visible politics. The contest over money continued among classes and interests, but fewer and fewer people could observe the action or understand how to participate. Over the years, in different circumstances, both Republicans and Democrats would find themselves provoked by the Fed’s “altruism” and complain that the Fed was injuring their constituencies. But political leaders were unable or unwilling to intervene. Having surrendered political control of the money question (and responsibility for it), America’s two major parties could summon neither the energy nor the political imagination to challenge the quarantine.

Rather late in the congressional debate, Senator Elihu Root, a Republican conservative from New York, had expressed an odd complaint about the new money system that Congress was creating. It was, he reasoned, an invitation to inflation. If the Federal Reserve was to provide banks with new money in exchange for their commercial loan paper, what was going to curb the process from printing too much money? The Discount loans, Root warned, would be made “upon security that is good until the time comes when, through a process of inflation, we reach a situation in which no security is good.” The standards for money creation, he feared, would “become modified by the optimism of the hour and grow less and less effective in checking the expansion of business.”

Senator Porter J. McCumber, Republican of North Dakota, made the same point more graphically. The new “elastic currency,” he predieted, would mean a money supply “which will pull out three feet and will come back only one foot.”6

Their objections were easily deflected in the congressional debate. The Federal Reserve Banks, the sponsors explained, could moderate money expansion at appropriate times simply by raising the Discount rate. Putting a higher price on money would discourage new borrowing by businesses, and as credit expansion subsided, fewer banks would come to the Discount window with new loan paper to exchange for new money. Besides, the “elastic currency” would be self-liquidating. As businesses paid off their loans, the money went back into the Federal Reserve Banks that had discounted their loan paper and the money was thus extinguished, retired from circulation. The answers satisfied most participants.7

Inflation, ironically, was only a peripheral issue during the Federal Reserve debates. Aside from Root and a few other skeptical conservatives, no one foresaw that the issue of stable money would eventually become the pivotal question of Federal Reserve performance, the core test of its monetary policies. Inflation did not seem especially relevant to the reformers of 1913 because they assumed that money’s value would continue to be stabilized, just as it had always been, by the gold standard. Their reforms would simply add a new flexibility to the mechanics of money and credit, a self-correcting auxiliary that would eliminate the periodic strains that caused bank panics. The new Federal Reserve Notes would still be as good as gold.

Like most momentous decisions in history, this one was loaded down with unintended consequences. The overwhelming majority in Congress who voted for Wilson’s measure did not grasp (any more than the President did) that they were creating a new management system that would replace gold as the regulator of money’s value and, therefore, would influence prices generally. Nor did they understand that the Federal Reserve Board would become an important throttle for regulating the tempo of the entire economy, stimulating or depressing production and employment with its money decisions. Most of all, they would have been appalled to learn that the new Federal Reserve Notes they were authorizing would become, in fact, the fiat paper money that had been proposed thirty years earlier by the Populist agitators.

The confusion of purpose stemmed in part from fundamental misunderstandings about how the new system would function, but mainly it resulted from unforeseen events no one could have anticipated. The crucial event was World War I. Even before the Federal Reserve Board could hold its first meeting in August of 1914, the great nations of Europe were at war. One by one, in order to finance their armies, the governments of Europe abandoned the gold guarantees behind their own currencies. While no one recognized it at the time, this was the beginning of the end for the gold standard in domestic economies worldwide. The United States would hang on to gold longer than others, but it too finally suspended the right of gold convertibility in the financial crisis of 1933. Until then, citizens could turn in their Federal Reserve Notes for an appropriate quantity of gold. After 1933, the Fed’s paper money would be redeemed only with more paper money.

One of the few who had the foresight to anticipate this outcome was Benjamin Strong, the “Morgan man” who was appointed president of the New York Fed and from that position dominated the affairs of the new central bank for almost two decades. In 1913, Strong wrote to his friend Paul Warburg warning that if Federal Reserve Notes were made an obligation of the U.S. government, they would inevitably constitute “greenbacks,” the fiat money that the Populists had sought. “If the United States government embarks once more upon the expedient or experiment of issuing fiat paper, although in this case supported by bank assets and percentage in gold reserve, the day will come when we will deeply regret it. . . .”8

Without the gold standard, money was on its own, so to speak. Rather, as Strong had feared, money’s value in the long run depended on one essential variable—the money-supply management by the Federal Reserve. This was not what anyone had intended—government-managed price levels—but there was no inclination to go back to the original decision and reargue it. Instead, Congress allowed the Fed to adapt to the changing circumstances and, in effect, to discover step by step how it should manage money. This accidental evolution of the Fed’s powers was a crucial element contributing to the institution’s privileged political status, exempt from intensive oversight, for it allowed the central bank to expand its de facto authority gradually, without first submitting to the test of congressional approval. In the strictest sense, Congress did not create the Federal Reserve System as it later operated; Congress ratified the reality of Federal Reserve power, a step at a time, after necessity had brought it into existence. The mystical reassurances of gold were gone at last. A new secular temple, run by mortals, was entrusted with the secrets.

The original instructions that Congress gave to the temple were vague (and not much improved over the years). The 1913 act said merely that the Reserve Banks should set Discount loan rates “with a view of accommodating commerce and business.” Credit should be provided to member banks with due regard to “the maintenance of sound credit conditions, and the accommodation of commerce, industry and agriculture.” In later years, subsequent legislation would add similar words and phrases to the Fed’s mandate, but always framed so loosely that the congressional intent could be interpreted to fit almost any policy in any season.

For many years, the Fed’s critics would complain, with justification, that Federal Reserve governors hid behind platitudes and refused to state the real economic objectives of their policies in meaningful terms. Certainly, Fed chairmen always resisted the occasional legislative efforts to impose more precise objectives on the central bank’s functions. The ambiguity and evasion, however, were not solely an invention of the Fed, but an implicit part of the original political bargain. To state the goals of monetary policy in explicit terms would require Congress to make the stark political choices it did not wish to face. If the objectives of money policy were visible and constant, then the class implications would be more visible too. Most everyone could figure out for themselves which groups were to benefit and which ones would likely be hurt, borrowers or lenders, eager entrepreneurs anxious for expansion or cautious owners of capital worried about stability. Keeping things vague was another way to avoid the central argument of democratic capitalism.

The Federal Reserve was not born in isolation. Its creation was the keystone in a profound alteration that occurred in the American culture of self-government—a new sensibility that devalued the potential of representative democracy and imposed limitations on it. The new perspective held that popular will, so turbulent in nineteenth-century politics, must be restrained in the new age of multiplying complexity and scale. Decisions on great public issues that were once left to politics should be consigned to disinterested experts, bureaucratic technicians who had specialized training. “Good government” must be managed. The managers must occasionally ignore public opinion in order to make correct decisions.

This new conception of American governance was a central principle of the Progressive reformers led by Woodrow Wilson, a movement populated by businessmen and professionals, members of the educated middle class that was emerging. They were managers themselves. They distrusted, even feared, the raw, barefoot politics unleashed by Populist agitators; they regarded public opinion as an unstable force, occasionally destructive. The implications of popular control of government were attacked most bluntly by one of the leading Progressive essayists, Walter Lippmann.

It is not possible [Lippmann wrote in 1922] to assume that a world, carried on by division of labor and distribution of authority, can be governed by universal opinions in the whole population. Unconsciously the theory set up the single reader as theoretically omnicompetent and puts upon the press the burden of accomplishing whatever representative government, industrial organization, and diplomacy have failed to accomplish. Acting upon everybody for thirty minutes in twenty-four hours, the press is asked to create a mystical force called Public Opinion that will take up the slack in public institutions. The press has often mistakenly pretended that it could do just that. It has, at great moral cost to itself, encouraged a democracy, still bound to its original premises. . . .9

The masses of ordinary citizens, though theoretically sovereign, were incompetent to govern—randomly willful in their opinions, blind to the complexities of modern life. The affairs of state and society would therefore be conducted by new elites of professionals, managers who could communicate intelligibly among themselves on important questions. In the nineteenth century, these autocratic views would have been swiftly denounced as anti-democratic heresy, but Lippmann’s disenchantment with popular opinion was widely shared by the Progressive reformers who dominated the first two decades of the new century. They attacked the corruption of big-city political machines with the city-manager form of government, designed to insulate public policy from the whims and greed of elected representatives. They devised a variety of federal regulatory programs, including the Federal Reserve and civil service reform, with the same purpose. A new ethic was born—faith in the technocratic approach to government—and this creed implicitly embraced what Andrew Jackson had denounced eight decades earlier: “A distrust of the popular will as a safe regulator of political power.” As the idea of management by experts flourished in twentieth-century politics, new bureaucracies grew up with it, putting further distance between raw public opinion and the decisions made by government.

The Federal Reserve was an exemplar of the technocratic approach. From the beginning, each Federal Reserve Bank and the board in Washington set out to build its own individual research department, staffed with bright young economists who systematized the gathering of banking and business data and began studying the private economy with the same methodological rigor as the academy. In time, the Fed’s assembly of economists would rank in size and prestige and seriousness with the leading research universities, though their work was mainly directed at narrow questions of economic management. The System’s many research departments did not, as a rule, hire eccentric thinkers who produced grand new theories of economics that might disrupt conventional thinking.

The government’s new emphasis on technical expertise only mimicked the trend that was simultaneously permeating American business. The days of the freewheeling entrepreneur were closing, as Woodrow Wilson had said. A new managerial approach was required to rationalize the vast new corporate enterprises thrown together in the generation of capitalist combat and consolidation. The idea of efficiency became enshrined as the test of performance, expressed most eloquently by the “scientific management” doctrines of Frederick W. Taylor, apostle of the “time study” approach to industrial production. A factory worker’s every step was carefully clocked and analyzed; then his work routine was modified to save time and motion and, not incidentally, labor costs. The assembly line merged men with machines in a continuous production process that need not pause for rest or reflection. Efficiency placed a premium on systematic coordination and duplication; it discouraged the “costs” of individual deviations.

The managerial ethic provided the cultural atmosphere that welcomed the new central bank as a legitimate departure from democratic accountability. It helped explain why Progressive reformers were so eager to insulate the Fed from politics. The money issues that were formerly political questions could be better resolved by disinterested technicians dedicated to the objective science of economics. Money was too complicated, too important, to be left to blind opinion.

But why did the general public acquiesce so meekly to managerial culture and the depoliticizing of the money question? After all, it was yielding control over issues that had stirred furious popular passions only a few years before. Jacksonian Democrats had attacked the antidemocratic implications of a central bank and rallied public opinion against the idea. The unwashed Populists had demonstrated that “plain people” did not need a college degree to understand the politics of monetary questions. What changed in the American character that allowed Americans at last to accept what for a century they had resisted?

In the demonological version of Fed history, the ordinary citizens— Jackson’s “real people”—were innocent. They were hoodwinked by elite conspirators, betrayed by feckless politicians. They were tricked into accepting an arrangement for money control that, as Henry Ford declared, would cause rioting in the streets if Americans ever understood its true nature. Certainly, there was abundant confusion and ignorance surrounding the Fed; but the notion of an ongoing conspiracy by governing elites, somehow thwarting the public’s true desires, does not satisfy the question.

The public acquiescence involved a complicated psychological transaction in the popular mind. The transition was connected emotionally to a deeper wound. Millions of citizens were already accepting a traumatic transformation in their own lives and values, adapting to a new order that would have appalled their ancestors. From 1890 to the 1920s, American life crossed a cultural watershed, one that produced giddy prosperity in everyday lives and also a lingering sense of loss and personal guilt. “The United States,” as historian Richard Hofstadter put it, “was born in the country and has moved to the city.”10

By 1900, only four in ten American workers were still on farms. A few decades earlier, the figure had been eight in ten. The economic dimensions of America’s transition from an agricultural society to an industrial society, the rapid and dramatic shift of population from rural to urban, were well understood. The emotional transaction was not. It left a deep cultural imprint of contradictory memory and emotion, still visible in popular values, a painful nostalgia for something that was lost and also a sense of liberation from old burdens.

Everything changed, even the language. In the Populist era, when the grassroots speakers appealed to the “producing classes,” they were speaking of farmers and factory workers, individuals who made things with their own hands, the “bone and sinew of the nation” in Andrew Jackson’s rhetoric. In twentieth-century usage, “producers” were no longer people; the term now meant those anonymous corporate enterprises that controlled most output, distinguished from their employees, the “workers.” In 1900, a rural census taker in Pennsylvania innocently listed all of the farmers in his district as “unemployed,” since all of them worked for themselves, not for someone else.

The American sense of loss was expressed most directly—and stubbornly—in the nation’s literature. In 1855, when Walt Whitman celebrated the national experience in “Song of Myself,” his poetry made music out of the sweaty diversity of American workmen: “Blacksmiths with grimed and hairy chests environ the anvil . . . The carpenter dresses his plank, the tongue of his foreplane whistles its wild ascending lisp . . . The farmer stops by the bars as he walks on a First-day loafe and looks at the oats and rye . . . The machinist rolls up his sleeves, the policeman travels his beat ...”

Two generations later, the lyrical celebration had been silenced, replaced by a dark and brooding literature of loss and corruption. Poets were no longer able to romanticize the American experience. The heavy novels of Theodore Dreiser, Sister Carrie, An American Tragedy and others, told, over and over in different story forms, the same moral tragedy: innocent Americans who left their simple country past for the dangerous excitement of the city, where they were ensnared by a brutal new system of economic organization, forced to cooperate with it, robbed of their native virtue.

This literature of alienation has endured throughout the twentieth century, for serious poets and novelists in America have never reconciled themselves to the terms of the modern economic system. They remain hostile to it and pessimistic, mocking the values of corporate bureaucracy, lamenting the soul-deadening materialism. Instead, literature and popular culture continue to celebrate what seems lost— the free-ranging individualism, the honesty and simplicity of rural life, the idyll of self-reliance. A familiar story line, repeated endlessly in novels, films and rock ’n’ roll lyrics, depicted the lonely rebel who resists and somehow beats the system—romantic tales that mourned the idea of America’s lost Eden.11

With loss, however, there was also reward. Millions of American families willingly traded roles in life: they ceased to be the independent yeomanry of American tradition, self-reliant and proud and skillful in the practical arts of self-sufficiency. They became, instead, employees and consumers. They went to work for someone else, usually a corporation, and their labor produced wages—pieces of paper in place of the “real things” of country life. The energies of individual expression, once devoted to daily survival, were diverted instead to consuming—buying things and using them, things made by others in some distant place. Both new roles—consumer and employee—made people more dependent on the abstractions of the money system than they had been as self-sufficient farmers, producing real goods. Money belonged to the city and its complexities. Country people, as they were drawn closer to the ancient mystery, were uncomfortable confronting money. Money was the everyday symbol of what they had given up.

Whatever people lost emotionally in the exchange, the compensating rewards were staggering in material terms. Before 1900, most households in America lacked the simple amenities of indoor plumbing and central heating, not to mention the luxuries of electric lights, telephones or automobiles. The new prosperity made possible by the industrial system would have stunned the Populist farmers of 1885, notwithstanding the continuing conflicts between labor and owners, consumers and producers, borrowers and lenders. The rush to the cities unleashed a virtual frenzy of buying and consuming, notwithstanding the dark portrait sketched by novelists. A proliferation of invention introduced liberating devices that saved time and labor— refrigerators, washing machines, radios, store-bought bread and a new fantasy life offered in the movies. Each was beyond the imagination of the old prairie radicals; all were soon accepted as basic necessities.

The emotional legacy was, thus, contradictory—a combination of pain and gratification, loss and reward. An individualist from the nineteenth century would complain that Americans were seduced by a Faustian bargain. People surrendered control over their own lives, accepted a smaller role for themselves as cogs in the vast and complicated economic machinery, in exchange for mere material goods. From the twentieth century, modern consumers might respond that, yes, but the devil certainly kept his half of the bargain. Ordinary citizens could now fulfill personal fantasies by acquiring things on a scale that in Thorstein Veblen’s day was reserved for the “leisure class.”

This inherited conflict of cultural emotions seemed quite distant from the technical complexities of monetary policy and the Federal Reserve, but it provided the deepest explanation for why the central bank was permitted to assume its privileged status, outside political scrutiny. The American character, when it moved from country to city, suffered a great wound of the spirit—pain and alienation that were salved with money. People regretted the loss; yet they also welcomed the escape. The new life offered an adolescent release from privation, mingled with the guilt of having surrendered something valuable. These complicated feelings intersected with all the potent psychological illusions surrounding money described by Freud and the others—money’s power of dread and potential, guilt and giving, immortality and death, the unity of contradictions. From country to city, citizens gave themselves over to the rhythms governed by this ancient mystery.

The Federal Reserve, as the new regulator of money, served as comforting mediator for the cultural transaction, a miraculous analgesic that relieved people of painful confrontation with their own guilt. The closer they were to money, the less they wished to know about it. The obligation of confronting the operative symbol of their new dependency or even understanding it was taken from their hands and citizens were permitted to repress the guilty knowledge. In time, ordinary citizens would no longer grasp the political meaning of money or even know that it existed. The burden was entrusted to a new technology that was as mystifying as the ancient temples. Like the temple priests, the Fed would satisfy the society’s collective sin and error by performing sacred rituals of sacrifice and expiation.

The first recession directly induced by the Federal Reserve began in the spring of 1920, though Fed officials disclaimed any responsiblity for it. A sharp spike of price inflation followed the close of World War I, just as inflation had followed previous wars and for approximately the same reasons. To finance the war, the federal government had borrowed heavily, and the national debt ballooned in a few years from less than $1 billion to $27 billion. By the fall of 1919, prices were rising at the rate of 15 percent a year. Benjamin Strong and his colleagues agreed that they must act to break the inflationary spiral.

Over the next few months, the twelve Federal Reserve Banks raised the Discount rate from 4 to 7 percent, and other market interest rates rose with it. If the Fed’s 1920 tightening appeared modest compared with the double-digit interest rates of modern experience, it was not. In a short period of time, the price of money was nearly doubled. Once the Discount rate was raised to a historically unprecedented level, the Reserve Banks kept it there, without relief, for eighteen months.

The result was a swift and dramatic price deflation and economic contraction that lasted for a year and a half, severe enough to earn the label of depression. Commodity prices fell from their early 1920 peak by more than 50 percent over the next two years and farmers were plunged once again into financial crisis. General business activity subsided by nearly a third. Manufacturing volume fell by 42 percent. Unemployment rose fivefold to 11.9 percent—an additional four million people who were out of work. As Jane D’Arista observed in her account of the Fed’s performance, “All prices fell except the price of money.”

The Fed managers deflected critics with narrowly worded denials. When an angry delegation of Farm Bureau leaders confronted Benjamin Strong, he responded disingenuously: “You inquire as to the man who gave this order for deflation. I know of no order being given.” Besides, Strong said, he was out of the country at the time.

Congressional critics, including Progressive Republicans and the out-of-power Democrats, threatened legislation to revoke the Fed’s independent charter, but the governors did not yield. Even the new Republican Secretary of the Treasury, Andrew Mellon, who was himself a member of the Federal Reserve Board, pleaded futilely with his colleagues to reduce interest rates, once prices were falling rapidly and the economy was shrinking. The political pressures failed.

Strong, addressing a conference of Reserve Bank officials in the spring of 1921, warned: “What this System requires is protection against misled public opinion, which will be reflected in Congress, in some foolish act by Congress. ...”

The Fed’s objective, as frankly stated in records of its own deliberations, was the restoration of “sound financial conditions,” not the restoration of economic growth. Bank failures increased dramatically during the 1920-1921 recession (from 63 in 1919 to 506 in 1921), but, on the whole, a period of stringent credit conditions would be profitable for most banks. The real value of their own financial assets, bonds and outstanding loans, increased proportionately, as prices fell and money “hardened” again.

The Fed policy makers concentrated on eliminating the inflationary fears of financial investors, not on lowering the unemployment rate or restoring farm prices. Indeed, the first objective was necessarily in conflict with the others. From the Fed’s perspective, declining prices were the goal, not the problem. High unemployment did not hurt, but helped. A surplus of labor forced wages down generally as more workers competed for fewer jobs; falling wages led to moderating price inflation. Even as late as April 1921, one member of the Federal Reserve Board, Adolph Miller, argued it was still too early to ease credit conditions because, in his judgment, wages were still too high. American industry could not return to a “safe and sound condition,” Miller explained, until the contraction produced “what is called the liquidation of labor.” The phrase, he conceded, sounded “a little offensive.” Strong agreed that labor must yield more before “sound central banking principles” would permit the Fed to relent.

The 1920-1921 depression was prototypal. Its severity was greater than most, but priorities were the same the Federal Reserve pursued in future episodes of contraction. The “dominant guides to policy were financial rather than economic,” Lester V. Chandler, Strong’s authorized biographer, concluded. “A central banker accepting this set of priorities,” Chandler explained, “naturally feared inflation more than deflation and insisted that on some occasions deflation was necessary for the attainment of primary financial objectives.”

Though chartered to accommodate “the needs of commerce and industry,” the central bank focused its concern on the health of the financial sector over the productive economy. In order to restore one, it was necessary to punish the other.

For those who truly understood monetary policy, a new reality was coming clear: the Federal Reserve System may have been created for the narrow task of providing an “elastic currency,” but its actual powers were far greater. The Fed’s decisions could turn the broad tides of economic growth and decline for the entire nation. Federal Reserve governors, as a practical matter, were making macroeconomic policy for the federal government before the term was even invented.

Woodrow Wilson’s compromise was also swiftly subverted. The Federal Reserve Board did not become the “capstone” Wilson had envisioned, speaking for the public and keeping a leash on the bankers. From the outset, the board’s authority was successfully challenged by the presidents of the twelve Federal Reserve Banks, who saw themselves as independent coequals (they were originally called governors themselves). Led by Benjamin Strong at the New York Fed, they united to go their own way. Over fifteen years, whenever the Federal Reserve Board in Washington tried to reassert control, the bankers would accuse it of political meddling.

When the System was first organized into twelve regions and Federal Reserve cities were selected, the choices themselves had not been entirely free of politics. Cincinnati and Pittsburgh were rejected in favor of Cleveland, hometown of Wilson’s influential Secretary of War, Newton D. Baker. Baltimore lost to Richmond, capital of Carter Glass’s home state. The System map seemed a reasonable delineation of the nation’s economic regions with one blatant exception—Missouri. While dozens of other states fought for the honor and lost, Missouri won two Federal Reserve Banks—St. Louis and Kansas City. The Speaker of the House of Representatives, Champ Clark, was from Missouri.

The twelve Reserve Banks formed their alliance against Washington around an issue that, at the time, seemed a peripheral question—the buying and selling of government securities. The original operations of the Federal Reserve did not use the open-market purchases of U.S. securities as the means to create new money or extinguish it. Money was created entirely through the Discount windows at the twelve Reserve Banks. Instead of buying or selling government notes and bonds, the Fed took in “real bills” of trade—the short-term debt notes that banks took when they lent to business and agriculture. When these notes were eventually paid off at the Fed, the money would automatically cease to exist. Creating money for real commercial transactions, it was assumed, would make the money supply self-regulating, growing and contracting always in step with the ebb and flow of private commerce and credit.

When individual Reserve Banks began buying government securities for their separate portfolios, it was not to regulate the money supply but to increase their own earnings. Treasury paper was a safe place to park idle funds and provided a modest return that would help pay for the banks’ operations. Most economists, inside and outside the Fed, did not grasp the larger implications—these random transactions were themselves expanding or shrinking the money in circulation. If Atlanta or Philadelphia bought $1 million in bonds, it was pumping high-powered money into the banking system—$1 million that would be multiplied by bank lending. If it sold bonds, the reverse occurred.

The wiser heads, including Benjamin Strong in New York, rather quickly recognized the connection. When Reserve Banks made open-market transactions, interest rates rose or fell, accordingly, in financial markets. On some occasions, there was plain confusion when one Reserve Bank would be buying bonds while another Reserve Bank was selling.

Strong persuaded the other Reserve Bank officials that the twelve Reserve Banks, at the very least, must coordinate their actions, a proposal that became the means for organizing the regional banks as a rival power center, independent of the Federal Reserve Board in Washington. The New York Fed, it was agreed, would handle all sales and purchases for the others, managed in a way that did not disrupt markets. The twelve Reserve Banks formed their own Open Market Investment Committee to decide things. The Federal Reserve Board approved, apparently unaware that it was ceding control of a powerful monetary lever.

For the banking community and for Benjamin Strong, the independent open-market committee provided the arrangement of power they had originally wanted in the new central bank. Before enactment of the Fed legislation, Strong had expressed his preference: “If we ever have a central bank, it must be run from New York by a board of directors on the ground. ...” Strong, a “Morgan man” and former president of Bankers Trust, had rather deftly circumvented the will of Congress and the intent of Woodrow Wilson.12

For years, the System’s open-market operations were too small to be significant, and conventional thinking still did not recognize the full implications for the larger economy. The Fed continued to rely on discounting, buying or selling commercial debt paper, raising or lowering the Discount rate to ease or tighten “credit conditions.” But these principles of money management contained a fatal and ruinous flaw, one that would eventually become visible to all.

After the recovery in 1921, the decade of the twenties proved to be an era of extraordinary economic growth, despite two more recessions that were much milder than the first. The Fed was implicated in both. One was attributed to the System’s excessive tightening of credit in 1923; the other was blamed, less persuasively, on the Fed’s failure to ease credit in 1926 when economic activity began to decline.

The 1920s, nonetheless, greatly enhanced the Federal Reserve’s stature. Thanks largely to Strong’s management, it was an era of relatively stable prices—“the high tide” of the Federal Reserve System, according to Milton Friedman and Anna Schwartz. At the same time, the robust American economy embarked on the “roaring twenties.” New technologies increased productivity enormously; the output per hour of labor rose by an astonishing 63 percent during the decade. Mass markets developed for automobiles and time-saving appliances like refrigerators. Sales of radios increased 1400 percent.

The Republican era of good feeling was epitomized by Calvin Coo-lidge’s relaxed sense of the Presidency. “If you see ten troubles coming down the road,” Coolidge said, “you can be sure that nine will run into the ditch before they reach you.” Treasury Secretary Mellon advanced a more sophisticated rationale for the old Republican doctrine of laissez-faire. Mellon, who dominated economic thinking through three Republican Administrations, argued that the old Populist idea of progressive taxation—higher rates for the wealthy, or “soak the rich,” as Republicans called it—was destructive to general prosperity. Instead of using the income tax to compensate for the maldistribution of wealth and income, tax rates on the rich should be reduced drastically in order to stimulate economic growth. The Republicans devised tax credits, refunds and abatements to benefit private corporations, and they enacted four major reductions in income-tax rates, purposely skewed to benefit the upper-income brackets. The Mellon argument —denounced by Democrats as “trickle down” economics—was that everyone would eventually benefit as the wealthy devoted the tax cuts to capital investment and new jobs were created. Mellon fell short of his ultimate goal—complete elimination of progressive tax rates—but his approach seemed for a time to be wondrously effective in stimulating new factories and expanded production.13

As the Republican prosperity unfolded, the Federal Reserve shared in the applause. Banking panics seemed to be a thing of the past. Inflation was vanquished. Economic performance was evidently aided by the Fed’s stable management. Informed opinion was in agreement: the promises made back in 1913 for the new Federal Reserve System had been more than fulfilled.

In the aura of self-congratulations, the darker portents of the 1920s were largely ignored. Farmers, unlike other sectors, never really recovered from the depression of 1920-1921 and the drastic decline in commodity prices. They remained trapped by deflated prices and glutted markets. In 1920, farm families had received about 15 percent of national income; eight years later, they received only 9 percent.

Labor, less obviously, was also losing ground. As industrial production expanded robustly, workers seemed to be sharing in the new prosperity, but they were also working longer hours for the same wages and borrowing more heavily to keep up. Primitive estimates of unemployment ranged from 5.2 to 13 percent, but the more relevant fact was that the work hours available per person actually fell by 7 percent during the decade. As labor surpluses built up, the struggling labor movement was decimated; unions lost nearly 30 percent of their membership. That and other accumulating evidence suggested deep instabilities in the economy, but most people were persuaded to ignore them. The stock market, after all, was rallying to new heights—a sure signal of more good times ahead.14

The Federal Reserve, in this setting, established another precedent for the future—its ability to obfuscate and confuse when under attack. Public discontent was blunted by long and complicated technical answers that diverted attention from the Fed’s own role in economic distress. The official answers were usually accurate in the narrow sense, but they grossly dodged the questions. The evasive techniques would become standard procedure in the System.

Following the price collapse of 1920-1921, angry farmers and livestock growers from the upper Midwest addressed a series of hostile questions to the Minneapolis Federal Reserve Bank. The answers were mostly huffy denials.

“The Federal Reserve Banks were responsible for inflation,” the farm representatives complained. “Why should they attempt to place the burden of deflation upon the farmer, cattleman and wool grower?” The Minneapolis Fed responded: “Deflation is not chargeable to the Federal Reserve System or to any group or aggregation of banks, bankers or financiers. It is the natural and inevitable national reaction from war conditions.”

But, the farmers asked: “Was it not unfair and unjust to the farmers for the Federal Reserve Bank to help big banking interests in their conspiracy to advance interest rates?” The Fed replied: “Neither the Federal Reserve Bank nor the big commercial banks nor any group of banks in this district has the power to make interest rates high or low. Few subjects are more simple, but there are few that are so generally misunderstood.” A long and not-so-simple explanation followed on how market forces of supply and demand determined the price of money.

Well, then, the farmers asked: “Is the Federal Reserve Board more responsive to the money power than to the farmer?” The careful answer was meant to reassure: “Congress was largely influenced in the adoption of the Federal Reserve Act in 1913 by a determined purpose to break up the centralization of the financial power in this country in New York. In view of the history of the Federal Reserve Act, it is more than unlikely that the Federal Reserve Board would show special consideration to the so-called money power even though it had the ability to do so.”15

High interest rates were an act of nature—caused by impersonal market conditions, not by anyone’s conscious decision. This became the stock response offered by successive Fed chairmen in subsequent decades, whenever rates went up.

Ben Strong, the dominant central banker in America during the Fed’s first formative decades, understood the political advantage in blurring the central bank’s influence over prices and the economy. The Fed would always be caught between the conflicting interests of consumers and producers, between finance and farmers, between lenders and borrowers. “There you are,** he said, “between the devil and the deep sea.”

“It seems to me that if the Federal Reserve System is recognized as a price regulator.” Strong explained, “it is going to be somewhat in the position of the poor man who tried to stop a row between an Irishman and his wife. They both turned in and beat him.”16

Benjamin Strong died in October 1928, and one year later, the Federal Reserve System suffered its historic disgrace. The stock market crashed and the American economy collapsed with it. The “new era” of permanent prosperity was abruptly demolished, followed by the Great Depression with unemployment at 25 percent and desperate poverty for tens of millions of Americans. Tens of thousands of businesses were bankrupted, and the panic of bank failures also returned —destroying more than forty percent of all American banks. The Federal Reserve was blamed for failure to act on both sides of the Great Crash—first for letting it happen, then for failing to reverse the devastation. The Fed's defenders liked to imagine that had Benjamin Strong lived, maybe the worst of the disaster could have been averted. It sounded like wishful thinking in hindsight.

Certainly, Strong saw the outlines of the gathering crisis before others did. In the summer of 1928, three months before his death, he warned a colleague that banks and investors were caught up in a dangerous frenzy of speculation, borrowing heavily to make speculative stock-market forays, bidding up prices so high that the rosy expectations could not possibly be fulfilled. The nation was giddily enjoying the Republican prosperity. The New York Fed was privately worrying about its collapse.

“The problem now.” Strong wrote, “is so to shape our policy as to avoid a calamitous break in the stock market, a panicky feeling about money, a setback to business because of the change in psychology, and at the same time accomplish if possible some of the purposes enumerated above.*’ The Reserve Banks, he said, must dampen credit and restrain the speculative lending, but without setting off that “calamitous break.”

This was a tricky business, though Strong thought it could be done. After his death, his successors tried fitfully and failed. They applied “moral suasion,” pleading with commercial banks to stop making loans for stock-market speculation. When that failed, they argued among themselves. Without Strong to impose his will, the Reserve Banks and the Federal Reserve Board were stalemated through most of 1929. Belatedly, they voted a modest Discount increase in August, intended to slow down the rapacious bank lending. The speculative bubble continued. Stock-market prices went higher and higher.

On October 24, 1929—Black Thursday—the bubble burst, the “calamitous break” that Strong had feared. Within a matter of days, the Standard and Poor’s composite index of stocks fell from 245 to 162, wiping out more than one-third of the stock market’s value. Something on the order of $7 billion in bank loans to financial investors was rendered worthless. A “panicky feeling about money,” as Strong had called it, swept the nation and the world.

In the tendentious postmortems over what exactly caused the Crash of ’29, Strong was himself blamed for the debacle. Adolph Miller of the Federal Reserve Board, among others, charged that Strong had personally engineered the major easing of credit in the summer of 1927—Discount-rate reductions and open-market purchases of $340 million—that pumped excessive liquidity into the banking system and permitted the artificial investment boom to take off. Strong’s easy-credit policy in 1927, Miller said later, “was father and mother to the subsequent 1929 collapse.”

The 1927 error, if it was an error, was at least motivated by Strong’s desire to aid the real economy. When he had leaned on his colleagues at the other Reserve Banks to reduce their Discount rates, he was worried. Employment was slipping, wholesale prices were declining again and business appeared to be sliding back into recession. The easier credit was intended to avert another contraction. But Strong had another more controversial motive—helping out the central banks of Europe. Presiding at the New York Fed, Ben Strong regularly collaborated with the central bankers of England and the Continent, trying to stabilize things so the gold standard could be restored internationally. The great international banking houses, from Morgan to Rothschild, had always worked closely with one another, borrowing and lending capital among themselves to balance out the worldwide demands for credit. From the start, Strong discreetly assumed the same role for himself—personal responsibility for representing America in global financial coordination, in an era when most Americans still thought of their nation as totally independent.

In mid-1927, Montagu Norman of the Bank of England called on Strong and urged him to ease U.S. credit. Strong promptly agreed to do it. The Fed would provide excess liquidity for the American banking system and that money could flow abroad, through foreign loans, to ease credit in the European financial markets, where tightening conditions threatened to push up interest rates. If rates rose sharply in London and Paris and Vienna, that would depress business and perhaps set off a general contraction. The explanation would certainly have rankled citizens of the United States if they had known it. World War I had left a great tide of isolationism in its wake. The suspicion that the Federal Reserve secretly served the needs of international banking at the expense of domestic interests would become a perennial source of resentment.

As Strong himself argued, however, the U.S. assistance was also self-interested—what damaged European business would in time also damage America’s. If Europe’s economies contracted, for instance, then Midwestern grain farmers would find no buyers for the surplus crops they exported. Like it or not, the world’s industrial economies were already closely interlocked, through both finance and production, long before the Federal Reserve came into existence. The “global economy” celebrated by modern commentators was different only in the degree of complexity, the volume and speed of international transactions. Despite his autocratic manner, Strong was ahead of his time in his internationalism.

Strong’s maneuver, in any case, did not work. It backfired. Given the weakened state of the real economy, the flush of excess liquidity he had pumped into the banking system was not needed for transactions in real commerce or production. The surplus of money flowed, instead, into financial markets—artificially inflating financial values and fueling the run-up of stock prices that ended abruptly in the autumn of 1929.

After the. crash, the Federal Reserve System did nothing. If Ben Strong had been alive and in charge, perhaps he would have acted to stop the collapse. At least, when he was expressing his fears of a “calamitous break” back in 1928, Strong understood that the Federal Reserve could quickly reverse such a disaster. 1

the psychology was different because the facts of the banking situation were different. Mob panic, and consequently mob disaster, is less likely to arise.

Strong was mistaken about the “mob” and its faith in the Fed. When the market broke, the same psychology that had driven banking panics in 1907 and earlier took hold, swept across America and Europe, and ultimately destroyed 9,800 U.S. commercial banks over the next five years. But Strong was making a more fundamental point: the Federal Reserve had ample power to stop such a crisis almost instantly “by flooding the street with money.”

That is what his successors failed to do. At first, they accepted the ruinous deflation as a natural, even desirable outcome. As the contraction deepened, they bickered among themselves about the correct response. Finally, rather late in the crisis, they tried briefly to reverse the decline, then abandoned the effort before it had a chance to succeed.

Money disappeared on a massive scale. As billions of dollars of bank debt were liquidated by defaults and bankruptcies in the economy, involving farmers and businesses along with the stock-market speculators, the process naturally extinguished money and the supply of money contracted. From 1929 to early 1933, U.S. money shrank in volume by more than one-third. The Federal Reserve could have intervened to reverse the contraction. It could have reduced interest rates sharply to stimulate renewed borrowing and business activity. More importantly, it could have purchased millions or billions in government securities—pumping new money into the banking system to reverse the price deflation and restart the dead economy. Instead, as President Herbert Hoover lamented, the Fed became a “weak reed for a nation to lean on in time of trouble.”17

Long afterward, the 1929 debacle left the general impression in political circles that it could never happen again. The Fed would not permit it. If another similar collapse ever occurred, the central bank would simply begin pumping up the money supply, creating new money abundantly until the crisis was reversed. When the Great Crash occurred, it was said, the failure stemmed from the Federal Reserve’s ignorance and impotence. Fed officials lacked sufficient knowledge of the economy to understand what was happening. They lacked the proper monetary tools to intervene successfully.

Comforting as the mythology was, it was not quite right. It was not that Federal Reserve governors lacked the tools to reverse the waves of failure after 1929. They could have pumped money into the economy by open-market purchases—“flooding the street,” as Strong had said—and that would have restarted the economic engine. But the governors argued among themselves over whether to use these powers to halt the collapse—and they decided against it. The Federal Reserve’s failure was a failure of human judgment, not the mechanics of money. Unless one assumed that the Fed had subsequently become all-wise, such decisive errors would always still be possible.

The central bankers of 1929 did not view the economic collapse as an unfolding tragedy, at least in its opening phases. On the contrary, they regarded it as a normal correction to excess. Ten months after the stock-market crash, amidst soaring unemployment, collapsing prices and an ominous new wave of bank failures, George W. Norris of the Philadelphia Fed sounded almost pleased by developments.

The consequences of such an economic debauch are inevitable [Norris told his fellow Reserve Bank officers]. We are now suffering them. Can they be corrected or removed by cheap money? We do not believe that they can. We believe that the correction must come about through reduced production, reduced inventories, the gradual reduction of consumer credit, the liquidation of security loans and the accumulation of savings through the exercise of thrift. These are slow and simple remedies, but just as there is “no royal road to knowledge,” we believe that there is no shortcut or panacea for the rectification of existing conditions.

The leading commercial bankers who advised the Fed agreed. The Federal Advisory Council urged the central bank to let nature take its course. “The present situation will be best served if the natural flow of credit is unhampered by open-market operations,” the council declared in November 1930.

Andrew Mellon made the same case with chilling clarity. The way out of the Depression, he confided to President Hoover, was more failure and unemployment, more liquidation. “Liquidate labor, liquidate stocks, liquidate the farmers, liquidate real estate,” Mellon declared. The Treasury Secretary believed, and many other Fed officials agreed, that panic and recession were good for people. “It will purge the rottenness out of the system,” Mellon explained. “People will work harder, live a more moral life. Values will be adjusted and enterprising people will pick up the wreck from less-competent people.”

Hoover was not so sure this was the answer, but the President had little influence over the independent leaders of the Federal Reserve System. Herbert Hoover, of course, became the political scapegoat for their failure; his name would be invoked by a generation of Democratic orators as the symbol of Republican indifference to human suffering.

As the Depression deepened, the Federal Reserve persisted in its passivity in part because the Fed’s money principles—the “real bills” doctrine—called for passivity. Again and again, in their private minutes and memoranda, the Reserve Bank officials insisted that the Fed’s role was merely to provide Discount loans to the commercial banks that asked for them—accommodating the credit needs of the economy. Of course, almost nobody was asking for new loans in 1930 or 1931. The economy was contracting and the banking system did not need expanded credit from the Fed. On the contrary, banks found themselves floating in an excess of reserves—a pool of surplus lending capacity—because they could find no customers who wanted to borrow.

When others urged the Fed to inject more money into the financial system, Norris of the Philadelphia Fed reminded his colleagues of the operating principle they had formally adopted in 1923 on the System’s tenth anniversary: “The Federal Reserve supplies the needed additions to credit in times of business expansion and takes up the slack in times of business recession.” That was the whole idea of an “elastic currency”—expanding or shrinking the money supply in response to business demands for credit. Norris complained that even the modest steps the Fed had taken on its own initiative would be regretted. “We have been putting out credit in a period of depression, when it was not wanted and could not be used,” he warned, “and will have to withdraw credit when it is wanted and can be used.”

Logical as it sounded, the theory was fatally flawed. The “real bills” approach meant the Federal Reserve would always be passively following the direction of the economy and exaggerating its cycles on both the upside and the downside—providing more and more new money to banks during a period of expansion and withdrawing more and more money during an economic recession. Thus, the Fed’s behavior deepened the great contraction through its self-imposed stance of impotence. The Discount rate, its principal means of control, was like an empty sail on a becalmed sea.

What was needed, as some Fed officials recognized, was an activist money policy that pulled against the economic tide rather than drifting with it—a countercyclical policy, economists would say, rather than the procyclical policy implicit in the “real bills” doctrine. In short, the Fed must be willing to inflate the currency on its own initiative— “flooding the street with money”—in order to counteract the natural forces of deflation and contraction that were under way. The Federal Reserve System had neither the desire nor the courage to do that.

Federal Reserve officers had another reason not to act—a rather ugly reason considering the human suffering abroad in the land. Reserve Bank presidents held back because they were anxious to protect the earnings of private commercial banks. That sounded callous and narrow-minded, but political scientist Thomas Ferguson and economist Gerald Epstein found confirming evidence in their research of the central bank’s archives—blunt private statements by the Reserve Bank presidents that no more additional money should be supplied because it was hurting the important banks in their districts.

For two years, some Fed officials, including the board chairman in Washington, Eugene Meyer, had pleaded with their colleagues to inject massively through open-market purchases. That would pull down interest rates and get prices and wages rising again, restimulating economic activity. In October 1931, the Reserve Banks actually did the reverse—raising the Discount rate by two percentage points in two weeks. Industrial production fell another 26 percent in the next six months. The money base shrank by another $90 million.

Finally, by April of 1932, Meyer and others prevailed, supported by the Morgan bank and important Wall Street financiers. They persuaded the Reserve Banks’ open-market committee to pump up the money supply and quickly. The New York Fed began buying Treasuries on an unprecedented scale—$100 million a week for eleven weeks, $1.1 billion in additional reserves. If the campaign had continued, it would have produced a turnaround in the economy.

But, in early summer, the Reserve Banks abruptly abandoned the initiative. The bold experiment was over. When the contraction resumed a few months later, a third wave of bank failures swept the country, more severe than the first two. Another five thousand banks would close.

James McDougal of the Chicago Fed was among the Reserve Bank presidents who objected to the Fed’s attempted activism. Major banks in the Chicago district, he complained, were suffering an earnings squeeze because of the Fed’s easy money. The expanded money supply drove down interest rates on government securities to a minuscule level, and in these slack times, the banks held large portfolios of government securities as their principal source of income. “We believe that the additional (open-market) purchases made were much too large,” McDougal wrote a colleague, “and have resulted in creating abnormally low rates for short-term government securities.”

Norris of the Philadelphia Fed agreed: “Further increases in excess reserves would adversely affect bank earnings. ...” Owen D. Young of the Boston Fed, who had voted against the open-market initiative in the first place, was “apprehensive that a program of this sort would develop the animosity of many bankers.”18 All in all, the episode was perhaps the starkest evidence in support of historian Gabriel Kolko’s estimate of the Federal Reserve as a political institution: it was created to serve the most important banks and, in this instance, it did, despite the horrendous losses it was to cause the nation at large.

The Federal Reserve backed off. The infusions of new money were halted. And nature followed its course to a climax of destruction. By early 1933, as Franklin D. Roosevelt awaited his Inaugural, a new wave of collapsing banks was under way, accompanied by still higher unemployment and many more business failures. As Democrats came to power, the national economy was ruined and the American banking system was ruined with it. Also destroyed was the reputation of the Federal Reserve System.

1

think you realize, as I do [Strong had written to a colleague], that the very existence of the Federal Reserve System is a safeguard against anything like a calamity growing out of money rates. Not only have we the power to deal with such an emergency instantly by flooding the street with money, but I think the country is well aware of this and probably places reliance upon the common sense and power of the System. In former days





