10 LEANING AGAINST THE WIND


On a Monday morning in the late summer of 1931, the lobby of the First National Bank of Ogden, Utah, was jammed with nervous depositors—people waiting in line to withdraw their money before the bank ran out of funds. Another Ogden bank, older and more distinguished, had failed to open that morning. Prudent citizens figured First National would be next, one more victim of the bank panics sweeping the country. “We can’t break this run today,” Marriner S. Eccles, the forty-year-old president, told his tellers. “The best we can do is slow it down. People are going to come here to close out their savings accounts. You are going to pay them. But you are going to pay them very slowly. It’s the only chance we have to deal with the panic.”

All day, as people waited nervously to get to the window, the tellers moved, as instructed, with maddening lethargy. They paid out withdrawals in small bills and counted slowly. They looked up the signatures of everyone, even customers they had known for many years. As closing time approached, the bank was still jammed and the tension increased. If the bank closed at the regular hour, scores of disappointed depositors were going to be powerfully angry. If Eccles kept his bank open longer, it might well run out of money.

Just in time, an armored car arrived at the door, delivering fresh cash from the Federal Reserve’s branch office in Salt Lake City. “As in the movies when the Union cavalry charges in to save all from the Indians,” Eccles wrote. He made a great show of ushering the armed guards to the vault. Then Eccles mounted a counter to address the crowd:

Many of you have been in line for a considerable time. I notice a lot of pushing and shoving and irritation. I just wanted to tell you that instead of closing at the usual hour of three o’clock, we have decided to stay open just as long as there is anyone who desires to withdraw his deposit or make one. Therefore, you people who have just come in can return later this afternoon or evening if you wish. There is no justification for the excitement or the apparent panicky attitude on the part of some depositors. As all of you have seen, we have just had brought up from Salt Lake City a large amount of currency that will take care of all your requirements. There is plenty more where that came from.

“This was true enough,” Eccles said to himself. “But I didn’t say we could get it.” The Federal Reserve did have plenty more cash. But none of it belonged to Eccles and First National of Ogden.

Marriner Eccles’s theatrics succeeded. The crowd dispersed. Reassured depositors went home without withdrawing their accounts and his bank survived. The nightmare recurred again and again, however. Like thousands of other American bankers, Eccles spent three years in continuous crisis, staving off the periodic “runs” that followed the Crash of 1929. He was more successful than most. The Eccles family’s chain of twenty-eight banks, scattered through towns and cities of the Mountain West, did not suffer a single failure. “To do so,” he confessed in his memoirs, “we had to adopt a rough and distasteful credit and collection policy. Living with ourselves was not a pleasant experience under these circumstances.”

The trauma profoundly altered Marriner Eccles and his view of the world. “I awoke to find myself at the bottom of a pit without any known means of scaling its sheer sides.” He was Mormon and Republican, reared in the conservative economic doctrines taught by his father: thrift and hard work and free enterprise. “A business, like an individual, could remain free,” his father preached, “only if it kept out of debt, and the West itself could remain free only if it kept out of debt to the East.”

David Eccles, the father, was himself living proof of these principles. As an adolescent in the 1860s, still illiterate, he had emigrated from muddy poverty in Scotland to the raw but promising wilderness of Utah. Twenty years later, by ingenuity and the sweat of his brow, he was a millionaire. The Eccles fortune was a classic American triumph, from the stage of development known as primitive capitalism. He began with timber and a sawmill. Labor and raw resources were his only capital. As he earned profits, he put them aside for future ventures. As the West developed its natural resources and attracted population, David Eccles created new businesses to serve the people—railroads, coal mining, Amalgamated Sugar, Sego Milk, the Utah Construction Company and banks, a chain of them.

The critiques of capitalism and the “money trust” heard in political circles “left my father cold,” Marriner Eccles recalled. “He had built his works by himself, owned many of them outright, and ran them all in a direct and personal way. He saw no reason why other men could not . . . re-create themselves in his image, providing, of course, they were left free to use their wits and will without government interference.”

Until he was forty years old, Marriner Eccles believed the same. His father, a Mormon polygamist, had two wives and two families with a total of twenty-one children. When his father died suddenly in 1912, Marriner Eccles became steward for his mother’s eight other children and manager of their share of the vast estate. He was only twenty-two years old, his formal education limited to high school. He was also as brilliant as his father in business. First Security Corporation, which he founded, became one of the nation’s first bank holding companies, operating twenty-eight banks in Utah, Idaho, Wyoming and Oregon. Utah Construction became a prime contractor for a jewel of western development, the great hydroelectric project called Boulder Dam. The Eccles enterprises expanded and prospered with the “roaring twenties.”

Then, like the nation itself, Marriner Eccles abruptly found himself in the pit of despair. Through eclectic reading and his own native intellect, Eccles gradually came upon explanations for the puzzling collapse of 1929 and the continuing Depression. Bankers like himself, he decided, only added to the problem by calling in loans and forcing the liquidation of their borrowers. Indeed, every individual enterprise, by doing what seemed sound on an individual basis, simply contributed further to the contraction. He arrived at a radical conclusion: “The only way we could get out of the depression was through government action in placing purchasing power in the hands of people who were in need of it.”

Eccles’s analysis contradicted all that his father had taught him. The robust economy of the 1920s had vastly expanded America’s capacity to supply goods—roads, public utilities, oil, manufacturing and other productive facilities, all had grown enormously. The problem was not supply nor inadequate savings for investment, as David Eccles would have assumed. The problem was the opposite: insufficient consumer demand for the products that America could now make. There was too much money channeled into savings, too little into spending.

As mass production has to be accompanied by mass consumption, mass consumption, in turn, implies a distribution of wealth—not of existing wealth, but of wealth as it is currently produced—to provide men with

buying power equal to the amount of goods and services offered by the nation’s economic machinery [Eccles concluded]. Instead of achieving that kind of distribution, a giant suction pump had by 1929-30 drawn into a few hands an increasing portion of currently produced wealth. ... By taking purchasing power out of the hands of mass consumers, the savers denied to themselves the kind of effective demand for their products that would justify reinvestment of their capital accumulations in new plants. In consequence, as in a poker game where the chips are concentrated in fewer and fewer hands, the other fellows could stay in the game only by borrowing. When their credit ran out, the game stopped.

The fundamental weakness of the 1920s prosperity, in other words, was not that Americans were profligate, spending too much and saving too little, but the opposite. “We did not as a nation consume more than we produced—far from it,” Eccles declared. “We were excessively thrifty.” The maldistribution of incomes guaranteed that millions of potential consumers—workers, farmers, everyone who did not earn enough to join the ranks of accumulating wealth—would eventually exhaust their purchasing power. “While the national income rose to high levels,” Eccles explained, “it was so distributed that the incomes of the majority were entirely inadequate and business activity was sustained only by a rapid and unsound increase in the private debt structure, including ever-increasing installment buying of consumption goods.” When the consumers’ chips were gone, when they could no longer borrow or buy things, the producers would naturally curtail their production of goods too. More factories were closed; more people lost their incomes. The game was over.

The solution became dazzlingly obvious to Marriner Eccles. His father’s creed of thrifty individualism, perhaps sound in its own time, was no longer valid for a modern industrial economy. As a millionaire himself, Eccles was certainly not hostile to the private accumulation of wealth, though he did resent the stubborn adherence to the status quo preached by his fellow bankers and businessmen. They insisted depressions were “God-given and not man-made” events and that no one should interfere in the process, least of all government. “It became apparent to me, as a capitalist, that if I lent myself to this sort of action and resisted any change designed to benefit all the people, I could be consumed by the poisons of social lag I had helped to create,” he explained.

For Eccles, it did not matter greatly who owned wealth or how much they owned. Money itself was neutral as an economic force—positive if it was put into transactions and investment, harmful if it was hoarded in idle savings. What mattered was that people kept their money moving. Wealthy investors or bankers, following individual reflexes for self-preservation in the contraction, would not put their idle money in motion on their own initiative. Why should they reinvest, reopen factories or lend to new enterprises when unsold products were already stacked up in surplus? Why make more goods to sell when nobody had the money to buy anything? The economic problem, therefore, was how to start money moving again—how to get money from those who had a surplus (but could not possibly spend enough of it) to those who did not have enough (and, out of harsh necessity, would spend money promptly if they got some).

The only mechanism that could accomplish this transfer, Eccles decided, was the federal government. The government could borrow idle capital held by the few and put it in the hands of the many— laborers and contractors, farmers and manufacturers, even the unemployed or the destitute elderly—people who would spend it. The government could do this simply by purchasing more things itself— roads, buildings, whatever—or by sending out benefit checks to eligible recipients—veterans, the unemployed, the elderly. Instead of paying for the goods and services or welfare through taxes, the government would borrow the money (if it raised taxes to pay for the spending, that might dilute the intended economic impact, taking money out of the private economy with one hand and putting it back with the other). Thus, by definition, Marriner Eccles proposed to do deliberately what his father, David Eccles, had always preached against—living on borrowed money, better known to later generations as deficit spending.

A policy of adequate governmental outlays at a time when private enterprise is curtailing its expenditures does not reflect a preference for an unbalanced budget [Eccles explained]. It merely reflects a desire and the need to put idle men, money, and material to work. As they are put to work, and as private enterprise is stimulated to absorb the unemployed, the budget can and should be brought into balance, to offset the danger of a boom on the upswing, just as an unbalanced budget could help counteract a depression on a downswing.1

The new economic principles that Marriner Eccles happened upon in his earnest research would be enshrined later as “Keynesian economics,” the doctrine that reigned over government management of the economy for nearly fifty years. Eccles articulated these new ideas at least three years before John Maynard Keynes would publish his General Theory and, for years afterward, boasted that he had never read anything by Keynes (an exaggeration, perhaps, since Eccles quoted Keynes as authority in at least one of his early speeches).

Eccles, in any case, was an untutored intellectual pioneer. An American banker from Utah, a man who had never studied economics or even attended college, was able to see what the great British economist himself saw, and Eccles had the uncommon courage to articulate this thinking before it became fashionable.

When Marriner Eccles testified before a Senate hearing in early 1933, he found a receptive audience. In addition to the new economic principles, Eccles described a specific agenda for how the federal government could spend more money: unemployment relief, public works, agricultural allotments, farm mortgage refinancing and settlement of foreign war debts. He also proposed reforms for long-term stability: federal insurance for bank deposits, a centralized Federal Reserve System, tax reform to redistribute income, a minimum-wage law, unemployment insurance, old-age pensions, federal regulation of the stock market and other economic sectors. In one sitting, a Mormon Republican banker from Utah had described most all of the reforms that would become known as the New Deal agenda of Franklin Delano Roosevelt.

“We shall either adopt a plan which will meet the problem of unemployment under capitalism,” Eccles told the senators, “or a plan will be adopted for us which will operate without capitalism.”

The left-wing intellectuals clustered around FDR as advisers instantly recognized that here was a kindred spirit. Despite Eccles’s background, they invited him to join the inner circle drawing up legislative plans for the new Roosevelt Administration. Only in America perhaps—and then only in crisis—could such an odd political convergence succeed, a creative coincidence that enabled this unschooled but brilliantly innovative mind to collaborate with liberal reformers and closet socialists on how to save America. One summer, Marriner Eccles was struggling to save his small-town banks from failure. The next summer, he was at the center of American political power, an intimate of the President’s and a principal architect of the New Deal’s reforms.

“I find some pleasure in noting,” Eccles later reflected, “that if I was a traitor to my own class, I earned this distinction long before Franklin Roosevelt was called one.”

The name of Marriner S. Eccles would be largely forgotten by later generations of political Washington, where few remembered his extraordinary role in the New Deal. In one corner of the capital, however, Eccles was still regarded with appropriate esteem. The Federal Reserve, on its seventieth anniversary, would rename its marble building on Constitution Avenue in his honor. At the Fed, his name was spoken reverently, as if to invoke a patron saint.

Marriner Eccles, in the course of the Great Depression, became the salvation of the Federal Reserve System, the man who rescued it from disgrace. With FDR’s support, and despite bitter opposition from his fellow bankers, Eccles personally designed the legislation that reformed the Fed itself—stripped the twelve Federal Reserve banks of their autonomous privileges and their veto powers and consolidated control of money policy in the seven-member Board of Governors in Washington. Appointed by Roosevelt in 1934, Eccles served as Federal Reserve chairman for fourteen years, while he also functioned as an important collaborator in White House policy making.

In political circles, Eccles restored the Fed’s good name. More important, he substantially altered the central bank’s own economic sensibilities. In fact, as John Kenneth Galbraith described it, the Federal Reserve under Marriner Eccles became “the center of Keynesian evangelism in Washington.”2

In the legislative upheaval of 1933, the American Bankers Association led the fight against one particular proposal. “Unsound, unscientific, unjust and dangerous,” the bankers warned. The New York Federal Reserve leaders and other Fed officials objected that the measure would intrude on their authority. Even the new Roosevelt Administration, reform-minded as it was, declined to endorse it. Congress went ahead and enacted the law anyway, and the measure proved to be the most important banking reform of the New Deal era—federal insurance of bank deposits.

Whatever the promises and expectations, the Federal Reserve System had not brought an end to the danger of bank “runs.” Federal deposit insurance did. During the 1920s, bank suspensions had fluctuated annually from 366 to 975 (from 1929 to 1933, they ranged from 1,350 to 4,000 a year). In 1933, once the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation was in place, the phenomenon of panic and collapse virtually disappeared from American economic life. By the 1940s and the prosperous decades that followed, the number of annual bank failures usually could be counted on the fingers of two hands and often on only one.

The main reason was public confidence—an unconditional guarantee by the national government that, no matter what happened or who was to blame, small depositors would get back their money if their bank was closed. At first, the guarantee covered deposits up to $5,000, a limit raised eventually to $100,000. The banks paid regular premiums to support the insurance fund, but ultimately it was a good-faith obligation of the federal government (and the American taxpayers). If bank failures should someday exhaust the FDIC insurance fund, Congress would doubtless appropriate the money to make good its guarantee and pay off depositors. With the FDIC sticker in the bank’s window, citizens need not rush to make withdrawals whenever they heard rumors of collapse; the panicky crowds that Eccles had faced no longer appeared. Their money was safe. Despite their original opposition, commercial banks now enjoyed a double layer of government protection—the federal guarantee that reassured customers and the Federal Reserve’s Discount lending that relieved temporary crises of liquidity.

Other reforms enacted in 1933 were aimed at the behavior of the bankers themselves and were intended to eliminate the self-destructive impulses that had contributed to the Great Crash and worsened the subsequent contraction. By law, banks were prohibited from paying interest on checking accounts—a control designed to stabilize the banks’ balance sheets and avoid the kind of earnings squeeze that had encouraged risky lending and, in bad times, led bankers to accelerate the forced liquidation of their loan customers. Banks would now enjoy “free money” from their checking depositors, which they could lend out, presumably at somewhat lower rates, with less pressure on their earnings. With this implicit subsidy from depositors, banks were expected to be more prudent in lending and also more tolerant when recessions made it harder for borrowers to keep up the payments.

Other measures were designed to insulate banking from the runaway speculation in the stock market, which had finally collapsed in the autumn of 1929. The Federal Reserve was empowered to set collateral rules for credit in the stock market, eliminating the highly leveraged transactions in which speculators could buy as much as $100,000 in stocks with only $10,000 in cash. With the margin requirement set at 50 percent, an investor could borrow no more than half of the purchase price from his broker (who would, in turn, obtain the credit from a commercial bank). By raising the margin rule, though it rarely did so, the Fed could curb the bank lending devoted to financial adventures.

At the same time, the banking industry was effectively split in half —compelled to choose between the short-term lending of commercial banking and the long-term capital raised by investment banks through issues of stocks and bonds. Before 1929, when the major banks typically did both, they were frequently accused of conflict of interest— floating a new issue of corporate stocks or bonds, then hyping the sales by pushing dubious securities off on their own deposit customers and trust accounts. The Glass-Steagall Act of 1933 forced a separation. The house of Morgan, for instance, chose to continue as a commercial bank (known later as Morgan Guaranty), despite its prominence in the capital markets. The same year, three Morgan partners (including J. Pierpont Morgan’s grandson) formed a new investment-banking firm called Morgan Stanley, which inherited most of the old Morgan clients, corporations that raised large blocks of capital through stocks or bonds.3

In their perennial rhetoric promoting deregulation, the commercial bankers were understandably silent about the government’s two most intrusive roles in their marketplace. Commercial banks longed to be “freed,” but not from federal deposit insurance or the Federal Reserve’s Discount lending. Yet to establish a genuine free market in finance, a “playing field” that was truly level, banks would have to give up both of those protective subsidies. Without those privileges, commercial banking would doubtless be more competitive. There would also be many more failed banks.

When Marriner Eccles laid out his blueprint for reforming the Federal Reserve, FDR bought the whole package and added one condition of his own—Eccles must agree to serve as chairman of the reconstituted central bank. “It is only fair that you should know that formidable opposition has developed. ...” Roosevelt told him. “However, I don’t give a damn. That opposition is coming from the boys whom I am not following.” Eccles replied: “Well, Mr. President, if you don’t give a damn, I don’t see why I should.”

Wall Street banking fought him on both fronts—Senate confirmation of his appointment and the legislation reforming the Fed—but Eccles won both struggles. The essence of the 1935 act was to acknowledge the reality that had already emerged haltingly over the previous two decades: the Federal Reserve’s money-supply regulation directly and powerfully influenced the course of the entire economy. If that was so, then these decisions could not be left to willful bankers operating twelve scattered Reserve Banks, each trying to defend his own local interests apart from the whole. Control must be centralized in one place—the seat of the national government in Washington,

D.C.

The Board of Governors was given bureaucratic authority over the Reserve Banks, the power to oversee their internal affairs and to override or ignore their policy decisions, on everything from plans for new buildings to staff salaries to changes in the Discount rate. Western banks, led by the Bank of America, supported Eccles’s reforms because they too resented Wall Street’s domination of the Fed. The twelve Reserve Bank presidents, with the practical exception of the New York Fed, became subordinates to the seven political appointees in Washington. The Fed’s protocol of elaborate courtesies attempted to obscure this relationship, but everyone at the big conference table understood it.4

At the same time, however, the Board of Governors was given further insulation from political control. The Secretary of the Treasury and the Comptroller of the Currency, both representing the elected Chief Executive, were removed as members. This change seemed minor to Eccles since he himself was a close adviser and political ally of the President’s, with the practical status of a Cabinet officer. Under Eccles’s successors, however, the distance between the Fed and the White House would grow wider. With no Administration representative involved in the making of monetary policy, the lines of political communication became fuzzier and less reliable. Public accountability became murkier too. Practically speaking, a President was held politically responsible for the results of Fed policy, but had no direct hand in shaping it.

The control of monetary policy was formalized in a new creature, the Federal Open Market Committee, in which, despite their reduced status, the Reserve Banks retained some clout. Eccles wanted the Reserve Bank presidents consigned to a lowly advisory capacity, with no voting power, but Congress compromised with the bankers and created the odd hybrid known as the FOMC. With seven of the twelve votes, the governors could dominate the FOMC, but consensus required more than a bare majority. If the governors were divided, the five votes of Reserve Bank presidents could be decisive.

The Reserve Bank presidents, who voted in annual rotation, could still exert some pull on policy—usually in a conservative direction. When political scientist John T. Woolley examined FOMC decisions covering the 1960s and 1970s, he found that 90 percent of the dissents cast by Reserve Bank presidents were in favor of tighter money. The governors, in contrast, cast 60 percent of their dissents to promote an easier policy. Governors were conservative-minded people themselves but, on balance, less conservative than their colleagues from the Reserve Banks.5

In purpose and operations, the modern Fed began in 1935. Eccles did not use the economists’ term “countercyclical,” but that is what he meant—a money policy that stimulated the economy in recession and restrained it when an expansion threatened to become an inflationary bubble. The Fed’s duty, he said, is “to assure that adequate support is available whenever needed for the emergency financing involved in a recovery program, and to assure that a recovery does not get out of hand and be followed by a depression.” His successor, William McChesney Martin, expressed the idea more succinctly: the Fed's role was ‘'leaning against the wind." whichever way it was blowing.

Discount lending, as the great contraction had demonstrated. was an impotent tool for this purpose. Indeed, the rise and fall of Discount borrowing followed the trends of economic cycles rather than pulling against them. On both the upside and the downside, the Federal Reserve would henceforth rely principally on open-market operations to regulate the money supply and influence the economy through interest rates. The Discount rate, though still important to the money market and to the Fed technicians who monitored it. would cease to be the main valve by which the Fed added or withdrew’ liquidity from the banking system. Government debt securities replaced short-term commercial notes as the principal financial paper in Fed transactions. U.S. Treasury notes and bonds became the main assets in the Fed's own portfolio.

This change in the composition of the Fed's portfolio sounded obscure and technical, but it had a profound political resonance. The central bank was shifting its primary focus to Treasury bonds and notes at the very time the federal government would be issuing lots of them—entering a new era of managed deficits that, in time. would swell the national debt and create a vast financial market in government debt securities. The timing of these transitions was a coincidence of history, but the shifts in monetary and fiscal policies interacted w ith one another, subtly encouraging the expansion of federal debt. The Fed. as lender of last resort, now bought and sold Treasury debt paper and accepted it as collateral against its own Discount window advances to banks. The central bank. thus, had a direct self-interest in maintaining the stability of the government-securities market, for both prices and trading practices. When the government borrow ed, the Treasury and the Fed routinely collaborated in the marketing of the new’ debt issues, anxious to ensure that the pool of private buyers could absorb the new’ bonds and that prices would not gyrate wildly.

The change in Fed operations inevitably pulled the Federal Reserve closer to the financial world—the bond traders of Wall Street. who would purchase U.S. securities—and allowed the Fed to be more distant from the commercial sectors of the real economy. The Fed’s own market interest was now mainly government notes and bonds, not the short-term commercial and agricultural loans that it was originally founded to serve. The political consequences w ere impossible to measure. but it seemed likely that this shift would influence the Fed's monetary decisions. Central bankers worried about all things, but they would worry first about the temperament of financial investors in the bond market, less about the consequences of Fed decisions for businessmen leading commercial ventures.

In the simplified hindsight of political memory, the Great Depression was summarized as one long decade of uninterrupted bleakness. New Deal reformers perhaps salved the pain with their vast public-works projects and welfare checks, but Washington’s deliberate deficit spending failed to produce economic recovery. The general misery was finally relieved only by the vigorous stimulation of World War II. This collective summary was crudely accurate, but the actual thread of events was more complicated and more instructive.

In strict economic terms, the great contraction that began in October 1929 ended in the spring of 1933 and a wobbly recovery began. The nation’s economic output slowly expanded over the next four years and prices began rising, but the recovery was too weak to restore the pre-1929 prosperity or even to reduce unemployment substantially. In 1933, 15 million were unemployed; four years later there were still 11 million out of work. The recovery was real, nevertheless, and the stock market, buoyed by reviving profits and prospects, enjoyed one of its greatest “bull markets,” doubling stock prices in two years’ time.

Then another sharp recession hit in 1937, less traumatic than the Great Crash but still punishing. It was as though the battered nation had struggled to regain its senses, but was then benumbed by a second blow. The causes seemed plain: the federal government, after running unprecedented peacetime deficits for three years, opted for balanced budgets. It cut the federal deficit in half in 1936 and again in half the following year. The Federal Reserve, for its own reasons, was simultaneously raising reserve requirements on banks, soaking up excess reserves and raising interest rates. The combination was devastating —a tightening fiscal policy and a more restrictive monetary policy. Together they wiped out the fragile recovery and put millions more out of work. It was this second recession of 1937 that finally and completely discredited the old orthodoxy of balanced-budget economics. It also confirmed the political hegemony of Keynesian doctrine.

The combat over ideas within the New Deal demonstrated how difficult it is for a conceptual breakthrough in economics to win respectability against the scorn of established wisdom, particularly the ranks of professional economists. Contrary to legend, the New Deal did not rush to embrace the new theory of deficit spending in 1933; it argued over the idea for years, temporized and compromised. One of the leading skeptics was the President himself.

During the 1932 campaign, FDR had promised fiscal prudence: “I regard reduction in federal spending as . . . the most direct and effective contribution that government can make to business. ...” This was not altogether insincere. Roosevelt left himself a loophole: he would tolerate federal deficits, he declared, only “if starvation and dire need on the part of our citizens make necessary the appropriations . . . which would keep the budget out of balance.” That was his justification for the vast public-works projects launched during his first months in office, for the emergency employment programs and other relief measures that created large deficits. The President was still ambivalent about the theory, however, and he salted the government with tenacious advocates from both camps—big spenders versus budget balancers—who tugged back and forth for control of government policy. FDR sometimes sounded loyal to one camp and sometimes to the other. “The contradictions between the afternoon and the evening positions made me wonder whether the New Deal was merely a slogan or if Roosevelt really knew what the New Deal was,” Eccles complained.

From his pulpit at the Federal Reserve, Marriner Eccles led the fight for greater federal deficits by the Roosevelt government and was usually frustrated by the compromises that FDR settled on. “It seems certain,” Eccles said, “that the President assented to two contradictory policies because he was really uncertain where he wanted to move.” To help bolster his side, Eccles recruited as Fed research director a young Harvard economist named Lauchlin Currie, whose thinking also anticipated Keynes. Currie recruited and converted others.

Eccles also helped launch the era of liberal credit, the easier terms for borrowers that became standard for American consumers. As a banker who understood leverage, Eccles argued that the government could have more impact on housing through mortgage guarantees and interest-rate subsidies than through direct spending. The funding for public housing, he said, “was just a drop in the bucket so far as need went.” But Washington could stimulate millions of housing starts by leveraging the credit market—knock a percentage point off mortgage interest rates with a direct subsidy and provide government guarantees to induce lenders to make long-term mortgages available, loans running for an unheard-of twenty years. Home mortgages had typically been limited to seven or ten years—which meant prohibitive monthly payments. The New Deal changes in mortgage finance laid the basis for delivering the “American dream” to millions of ordinary families —a home of their own, purchased with long-term mortgages and payments they could afford.

When Keynes published The General Theory in 1936, he was not announcing new ideas to the world. He was formulating them in the rigorous scientific terms that other economists could not so easily ignore. “The effect of The General Theory,” Galbraith explained, “was to legitimize ideas that were in circulation. What had been the aberrations of cranks and crackpots became now respectable scholarly discussion.” The pre-Keynes Keynesians included Adolf Hitler. After 1933, Hitler initiated the Third Reich’s version of government-induced recovery—borrowing vast sums to build superhighways and armaments. He was so successful that by 1936 the Depression was substantially over for Nazi Germany.

The profession of economists seemed permanently conservative in its mode of thinking—always the last to know when old verities were crumbling and new ones emerging. As a group, they defended the status quo, whatever it was, until real events destroyed it. In the Populist era, most economists had derided the agrarian reformers who described the liabilities of the gold standard. In the 1930s, they dismissed original thinkers like Marriner Eccles. A generation later, having embraced the new Keynesian orthodoxy, mainstream economists would be blindsided again by changing realities.

John Maynard Keynes’s many-chambered masterpiece was courageous in that sense, for with densely technical arguments he was systematically refuting what his profession had believed since the days of Adam Smith. Classical economics taught that free markets, constantly self-correcting, would always find a natural equilibrium for wages, production and prices. Unemployment was a temporary dislocation, naturally eliminated as wages fell to match the demand for labor and prices adjusted accordingly. The premise was not exactly wrong, Keynes argued, but equilibrium was the exceptional condition, only rarely realized, rather than the general rule. He described how the mechanics of finance and capital formation, in fact, regularly left industrial economies operating below full employment and well short of their full potential.

In particular, Keynes upended a bedrock principle of classical economics known as Say’s law (after J. B. Say, a French disciple of Adam Smith’s): supply produced its own demand. The process of economic activity, according to Say’s law, began with producers investing and making things, then finding markets for them. In the modern economic system, Keynes explained, it was more the other way around. Manufacturers would not produce if they could not first see a market for their goods. The “demand side”—not the “supply side”—was where the action began.

The ruinous disequilibrium known as the Great Depression, Keynes argued, flowed from an excess of savings that could not find viable investments in production. The morbid capital would not be invested in creating new supply until it was clear that there was sufficient demand—buyers who could purchase things. The solution, therefore, was to manipulate the level of aggregate demand in order to stimulate production, to convince savers that it was profitable again to invest and restore the miraculous process of capital formation and compound interest which multiplied the world’s wealth.

Despite his Cambridge education, aristocratic manner and wealth, Keynes was also an outsider in his own way. He was an aesthete who enjoyed describing himself as an “immoralist,” a leading member of that sparkling circle of British intellectuals known as the Bloomsbury group that defied Victorian mores in both art and love. Keynes was married but was also homosexual, a fact that automatically put him in defiance of social convention.

Keynes’s rebellion against economic orthodoxy, as he explained himself, was not derived from the political discontents of socialism and class conflict. It was based on a psychological insight: capitalism was ripe for unprecedented abundance, universally distributed, if only human society could get beyond the stern dogma of the Protestant ethic, the Calvinist ethos that insisted self-denial and suffering were good and necessary for the human spirit. Save for the future, the Calvinist creed taught, and you will be rewarded in the long run and certainly in heaven. “In the long run,” Keynes observed, “we are all dead.” Enjoy the here and now, he insisted. Pleasure is good. Suffering is mostly unnecessary.

The Keynesian ethic won the argument. In most modern economies, dependent on mass consumption, pious rhetoric was still devoted to Calvinist themes of thrift and self-sacrifice, but everyday reality followed Keynes to the pleasurable life of easy credit and self-gratification. The conversion was embraced, most dramatically, in the hearts and habits of Americans.

As a political idea, Keynesian doctrine was equally influential. Conservative critics decried it as the advent of socialism, but the core of Keynesian politics was quite different. What Keynes proposed was not class conflict, but reconciliation. His economic prescriptions suggested the terms for peaceful resolution. By intervening judiciously to correct capitalism’s flawed mechanism, government would save the marketplace from the political struggles that threatened it, labor versus capital, consumers versus producers, poor versus rich. Keynes’s remedy, as Robert Skidelsky explained, “avoided having to choose between capital and labor. Keeping demand buoyant would simultaneously underwrite high profits, full employment and rising wages, thus eliminating or at least easing the conflict over the distribution of wealth.”

Crudely stated, his formulation offered something for everyone—a promise bound to appeal to both politicians and voters. Instead of the ancient war of class interests that divided citizens into winners and losers, here was a political approach that suggested everyone could gain. In loftier terms, Keynes (and Eccles and the others) provided the political community with a unifying principle for economic decisions: everyone rides in the same boat. Given the complex relationships of the modern economy, everyone will prosper together or, ultimately, everyone will languish. Capital will not collect its rewards unless labor gets its due. Workers cannot be healthy if producers are sick. Savers cannot reap profit if no one is able to borrow their savings and use them productively.

Enlightened self-interest required cooperation, a negotiated sharing of rewards. The Keynesian perspective became the unstated premise for most bargaining in modern politics. The perennial arguments over taxes and spending were mainly contests over the size of the shares, who got how much and what the likely effect would be on economic growth, but class arguments were considered passe. Fundamental questions about the American system, like those raised by the Populists or labor socialists, receded. Fierce political struggles between labor and management and other competing interests continued, of course, after Keynes, but his ideas were a moderating influence. Like the creation of the Federal Reserve in 1913, the advent of Keynes helped to submerge the class conflicts embedded in American politics.6

This generous political spirit—the truce implicit in Keynesian doctrine—closely resembled the practical principles by which Franklin Roosevelt governed. Despite the fractious politics and FDR’s derisive attacks on Wall Street’s “economic royalists,” the true spirit of the New Deal was conciliatory and collaborative. He was remembered as labor’s champion, but Roosevelt was also supported by important elements of Wall Street, including leading investment bankers. FDR’s many reforms were, in a sense, a series of “new deals” worked out with various sectors of the economy, both the injured and the prosperous. His bargains did not put an end to conflict, but they did lower the intensity.

In addition to the uneven efforts to increase aggregate demand, the New Deal also worked on the other side of the equation—programs to limit supply. Farmers, vulnerable to supply gluts and drastic market fluctuations since the Populist era, were protected against price instability with a subsidy program that, in exchange, imposed limits on how much they produced. Organized labor, vulnerable to competition from the nonunion workers willing to accept lower wages, was given labor-law enforcement for its efforts to restrict the supply of labor available to employers. In exchange, labor surrendered its own freewheeling tactics of disruptions and accepted the orderly regulation of disputes.

The New Deal regulatory schemes developed for various sectors— oil production, trucking, communications, airlines—imposed government supervision over these private industries, but they also stabilized them by controlling supply. Competition was limited by setting prices and restricting access to the markets by new ventures that might undercut the arrangements. Conservative critics called them government cartels, but the arrangements resembled the protection that government already had provided to banking.

Once the 1937 recession hit, the economic argument among the New Dealers was settled. Keynes won. The lesson was that balanced budgets could do real harm to the economy. The only thing wrong with the New Deal’s deficits was that they had not been large enough to get the job done.

Marriner Eccles refused to accept any of the blame for the 19371938 recession, but economists spanning the conservative-liberal spectrum from Milton Friedman to John Kenneth Galbraith agreed that the Fed itself had inadvertently helped unravel the nation’s fragile recovery. In 1936 and early 1937, thinking it would cause no harm, the Federal Reserve doubled the level of reserve rquirements for commercial banks—at the same time the executive branch was tightening its fiscal policy. By August 1937, a new contraction was under way.

Until then, the central bank had followed a “passive” monetary policy, allowing plenty of room for economic expansion to take hold. Interest rates were low; excess bank reserves were abundant. Eccles was convinced, like other Keynesian liberals, that monetary policy could not be the main engine driving the recovery. The Fed could make plenty of money available, but the Fed could not compel people to borrow it. The most potent contribution the Fed could make to stimulating aggregate demand was through interest rates—keeping the price of money cheap while fiscal policy did the main work of encouraging business activity. On these assumptions, the Federal Reserve developed the operating approach that prevailed for several decades and would come under attack a generation later from Milton Friedman and the monetarists. The central bank focused its control primarily on interest rates and “credit conditions,” instead of money and the money supply.

The irony of Eccles’s leadership as Fed chairman was that while he restored the Federal Reserve’s stature as a governing institution and was honored ever after by its officers, Eccles himself believed the central bank should play a subordinate role—complementing the fiscal policy set by Congress and the President and aiding the government in its borrowings. .

The Fed simply cannot be isolated as the cause of our economic problems [Eccles once explained]. It is not all-powerful. Its overall objective is to maintain an adequate rate of economic growth, low levels of unemployment and reasonable price stability. But its principal job under present conditions is to supplement fiscal policy. The fiscal problem continues to be one of heavy deficit financing, and the Fed, whether it likes it or not, is required to provide adequate reserves to the banking system in order for the government to finance its needs, even when that is inflationary.7

Eccles’s large mistake was the tightening he began in 1936. The reserve requirement was raised, in a series of increases, from 12.5 percent to 25 percent. Most banks could meet the higher requirement with their excess reserves, but the action also produced a general increase in interest rates in financial markets. When the new recession unfolded, Eccles lost some of his esteem as a member of FDR’s inner circle. “A mood of near panic took hold of some highly placed people in the Administration,” Eccles said, “and with very few exceptions they cast sour looks in my direction.”

The episode seemed to confirm what the Keynesian liberals already believed about monetary policy—the best thing the Fed could do for economic growth was to get out of the way. Money should accommodate the economy and stop interfering with it. In the turmoil of World War II, the Federal Reserve did, in fact, adopt a policy of total passivity.

“The 1937 action was the last error of the Federal Reserve for a long time,” Galbraith wrote. “That was because it was its last action of any moment for fifteen years.”

When Paul Volcker was an undergraduate at Princeton University in 1949, majoring in economics, he chose to write his senior thesis on the topic “The Problems of Federal Reserve Policy Since World War II.” The 256-page essay was a scholarly account of how America’s central bank, yielding to the financial imperatives of World War II, had lost its power to control money and prices. Volcker predicted— correctly, as it turned out—that something had to give. Either monetary discipline must be restored or the United States would face continuous inflation.

“Although the inflation problem continually raised its head in a disconcerting manner and demanded attention, the countermeasures taken have not appeared to be a realistic attempt to combat the danger,” Volcker wrote. “The policies followed have been largely passive.”

If Marriner Eccles had read the young undergraduate’s analysis, he would not have disagreed. During the war, as the federal government borrowed hundreds of billions, the Federal Reserve explicitly supported the Treasury debt financing with its monetary policy, pumping more liquidity into the banking system so that private buyers would be able to absorb the new government securities. The Fed followed Treasury’s instructions, yielding any pretense to independence. The central bank’s money-supply management was “pegged” to one purpose—low interest rates. The interest rate on the longest-term government bonds was held at a steady 2.5 percent throughout the war and short-term rates were correspondingly lower (ninety-day T-bills paid less than .5 percent).

If market pressures threatened to push rates higher, the central bank simply bought more Treasury issues itself, thus adding more money to the financial system and preventing the price of money from rising. In effect, the Fed guaranteed that if there was any Treasury paper that the private market would not buy, then the Fed itself would buy it. In 1933, when FDR took office, the national debt was $22 billion. When Pearl Harbor was attacked in 1941, it was $48 billion. By V-J Day, when the war ended in 1945, the national debt was $280 billion.

Paul Volcker, the economics major, concluded that the Federal Reserve must stop “pegging” interest rates at a fixed level and allow rates to rise to reflect market pressures “in order to have an anti-inflation policy worthy of the name.”8 Inside the government, Marriner Eccles was making the identical argument—and becoming increasingly unpopular for it. “I regret that the Federal Reserve did not take a more independent position despite Treasury resistance,” Eccles wrote in his memoirs. “There was no justification for our continued support of the Treasury’s wartime cheap-money policy.”

During the war itself, Eccles quarreled regularly with Treasury on how to finance the mobilization, but he was compelled to acquiesce. The Federal Reserve had played a similar role in supporting the government’s borrowing for World War I. Lincoln had printed “greenbacks” to pay for the Civil War. History and politics argued that a nation at war, threatened with survival, will do whatever it needs to do in order to win and worry later about the financial consequences.

Eccles did not disagree with that general proposition, but he objected in particular to the financing methods. The periodic Victory bond drives staged by Treasury, he said, meant “outrageous profits” for banks and large investors because the arrangement allowed a daisy-chain exploitation of the Fed’s money creation. To ensure a successful bond sale and stable interest rates, the Fed expanded bank reserves by buying up outstanding government securities. The commercial banks lent the expanded money supply to private customers who would in turn lend it to the government by buying the new Treasury issues. The customers then sold their new government securities to the commercial banks—and they eventually sold them back to the Fed when the central bank was again required to expand the money supply. In a roundabout way, the government was borrowing its own money—and paying a fixed fee to middlemen for the privilege.

The bankers, of course, were delighted with most aspects of Treasury financing, as were government bond dealers and the brokers [Eccles complained]. The practices followed ensured them a windfall of profits, as they did to countless corporations and insurance companies. A substantial part of the buying did not come from genuine savings; it came from money created by the banking system through the very process of buying the securities held by non-bank investors.

Eccles wanted to prevent the “free riding” by limiting bank participation in the market chain of government securities and by issuing government bonds that could not be resold. He was never able to prevail. Eccles also pushed for a policy that every political leader found difficult to sell in wartime—the additional sacrifice of higher taxes. Federal taxes were raised sharply, but World War II was mainly paid for with loans to the government. From 1940 to 1945, about 60 percent of the federal government’s expenditures were financed through borrowing, not revenue.

Marriner Eccles, the original advocate of bold deficit spending, now became the “sound money” scold of the Roosevelt Administration. He continually urged FDR to borrow less and tax more, to finance the war from the swollen savings of consumers rather than the artificial expansion of money. Inflation was largely avoided by the wartime controls on wages and prices. But once controls were lifted, he warned, the grossly expanded money supply would become an “engine of inflation.”

The economic consequences of World War II were, nonetheless, extraordinarily bountiful for America. Keynesian liberals looked upon the experience, justifiably, as the finest hour for their doctrine—full confirmation of what was possible with central planning and government manipulation. Every war had produced robust economic growth, but World War II resembled an industrial revolution. In only five years’ time, the nation’s annual output increased by more than 75 percent. In 1942 alone, the Gross National Product expanded by 16 percent and the next year by 15 percent and another 15 percent the following year (annual growth of 5 percent would be considered exceptional in later decades). The Federal Reserve was totally accommodating throughout. It never let money or interest rates get in the way of economic growth.

The operative principle was Keynesian economics on the grand scale: create new supply by first creating new demand for it. The government borrowed and spent in unprecedented volume, and the government’s spending created the market for new products and newly emerging technologies. To meet the necessities of war, the government, in effect, force-fed the rapid development of new productive facilities across many industrial sectors. These would become the basic industries of America’s postwar prosperity—electronics, petrochemical synthetics, aircraft frames and engines, shipbuilding, steel and nuclear power, among others. The new industrial base created by World War II was the platform that launched America’s global hegemony, the era of multinational corporations based in the U.S. and astride the world economy. This revolution might also be called “supply side” economics, but it was done from the gospel according to Keynes.

For consumers, the war mobilization was a time of sacrifice—automobiles, houses and appliances were simply not produced, meat and sugar and gasoline were rationed, wage levels and prices were administered by Washington bureaucrats. For the 12 million citizens who served in the armed forces, the economic sacrifice was especially severe—lost years of work and wages (not to mention the risk of getting killed or wounded). Overall, however, the self-denial of the war years was laying the groundwork for an abundant future. During the war, per capita income rose more than 40 percent above the 1939 level. With so many millions conscripted for war, unemployment vanished and labor scarcity became the problem. World War II was “an equal opportunity employer”—women and blacks filled prime industrial jobs previously reserved for white males. With limited ways to spend their rising incomes, families saved more of their money (partly by buying war bonds, lending the money to the government). In 1943 and 1944, personal savings reached extraordinary levels—25 percent of incomes. After 1945, this pent-up consumer demand would drive the postwar prosperity, private citizens replacing the government’s war as the principal customer for American production. Once again, people could spend their money on the things they had been denied— cars and vacation trips, suburban houses and appliances, a new cornucopia of goods to buy.

World War II was a model of the possible. In theory, if a national consensus of purpose developed, if people would accept temporary limits on their economic choices as well as regulatory controls on wages and prices, the nation could literally rebuild itself, almost overnight. With the right choices, America could practically double the productive capacity of its economy and advance innovation and dramatically multiply new wealth and incomes. These economic choices, however, were really political questions: who would take the sacrifices and who would reap the rewards? Whose consumption would be restrained and whose production would be encouraged? All this consigned extraordinary powers to government, perhaps tolerable only in war. No one, including the most ardent Keynesian planners, has ever figured out how to re-create a comparable combination of creative sacrifices in peacetime or how to sell it to a free society.

As controls were gradually lifted, the predictable postwar price inflation did occur—8.5 percent in 1946, 14.4 percent the next year. Yet, despite the huge swell in government debt, the inflation after World War II was notably less intense than the price spirals that had followed other major wars. A substantial share of the government debt, vast as it was, had been spent on real capital formation—investment in new factories and new technologies that raised the productivity of the nation in real terms. If real production increased more or less in step with the expansion of money, it would not be inflationary. Debt was a gamble on the future, and in this instance, the bet paid off.

The prevailing political consciousness after World War II, in any case, was still preoccupied by the searing memories of the Great Depression—not by the risk of inflation. Many assumed that without war as a stimulus, the suffering of economic contraction would resume. If mistakes were going to be made in economic management, they would be on the upside—keeping the economy going and avoiding a repeat of the 1930s calamity. One economic fundamental was different, however, after World War II. The government did not really demobilize for peace. After a brief interlude, the Cold War began in earnest and defense budgets rose again. A vast arsenal and a standing army of war-fighting capability became a permanent commitment of federal spending—and a permanent contribution to aggregate demand.

The postwar dilemma for the Federal Reserve intensified, however, as the swollen public debt was now joined by rapidly expanding private debt. As consumers, investors, manufacturers and other businesses were gradually freed from the wartime controls on borrowing, their demand for bank credit added pressure on the money supply. If the central bank must continue to acquiesce, providing whatever money was needed to keep interest rates from rising, Fed officials felt impotent to brake inflationary pressures.

“There is no limit to the amount of money that can be created by the banking system,” Eccles warned, “but there are limits to our productive facilities and our labor supply, which can be only slowly increased and which at present are being used to near capacity.” This was the Marriner Eccles that the Federal Reserve remembered reverently—talking like a worried central banker, not a liberal dreamer.

Yet Treasury wanted to keep interest rates low, both to hold down the cost of government borrowing and to encourage private economic activity. It was, Eccles acknowledged, “a conflict of responsibilities. The Treasury’s primary job is to finance the government at the lowest cost at which it can. . . . The Federal Reserve has the job of regulating money and credit in such a manner as to help maintain economic stability.”

Something had to give. Eccles and the Federal Reserve Board began halting efforts to declare their independence and break free of their subordinate position. Several times they attempted to let interest rates rise. On each occasion, the Treasury Secretary rebuked them and, as Eccles said, “implied that we were proposing to stage a sit-down strike.” Once the hero of liberal reformers for renouncing his conservative Republican roots, Eccles now found himself accused of apostasy: “Insisting on a balanced budget and tighter credit policies, Eccles has forsaken his earlier position in the New Deal years and gone over to the camp of the reactionaries.” In 1948, President Harry Truman declined to reappoint him to another term as Fed chairman and named Thomas B. McCabe instead. After fourteen years, Eccles bore his scars proudly—despised by the bankers, no longer trusted by the bankers’ enemies.

The Fed’s dilemma was still unresolved when Paul Volcker, a future chairman, wrote his senior thesis at Princeton. Volcker proposed a heretical solution. The conflicting responsibilities for government debt financing and the constant tug-of-war between Treasury and the central bank could be resolved by simply extinguishing the Federal Reserve’s independence and making it part of the Treasury Department. This would be roughly comparable to other industrial nations like Britain and France where the central banks take their instructions from the elected government. Marriner Eccles would have been horrified by the suggestion. And so would Paul Volcker when he matured as a central banker.

The conclusion seems clear [the young Volcker wrote] that there must be some better method for assigning responsibility for monetary control than at present. Either the monetary authority should be located entirely in the Federal Reserve System or the Treasury and the Reserve System should be combined in one agency. This would seem to be more logical because the fiscal actions of the Treasury are bound to have large monetary implications.

Admittedly, past actions of the Treasury have not always indicated that it could be safely entrusted with discretionary monetary authority; but, since its influence cannot be excluded anyway, the unification would give some promise of eliminating the indecision, conflict and irresponsibility which tends to make any policy result in failure.

Political accountability would thus be located in one place, the executive branch, which was answerable at elections for the economic consequences of its decisions. Fiscal policy, the government’s spending and taxes, would necessarily have to mesh with its monetary policy, the regulation of money and credit expansion. If a President used this power to ensure cheap money, he would also have to accept the blame for whatever price inflation resulted. If an overly stringent credit policy caused a recession, the President could not point impotently at the Federal Reserve as his excuse.

The solution proposed in Paul Volcker’s undergraduate thesis was not seriously considered when, early in 1951, the conflict reached its crisis point. The Federal Reserve Board announced again, more forcefully than before, that it would no longer hold down interest rates. Harry Truman called the entire Federal Open Marken Committee to his office for a chat and, afterward, the White House announced that all was resolved amicably—the Fed would continue to fix interest rates at the same old levels.

But the argument was not resolved. A few weeks later, the Fed again resisted and the President assented to a negotiated settlement between officials of Treasury and the central bank. The results were announced in March 1951 as the Treasury-Federal Reserve Accord. The agreement was a delicate compromise in which Treasury acceded to slightly higher rates and granted minor flexibility to the Fed. Eccles, no longer chairman but still a board member, took part in the bargaining. The principal negotiator from Treasury was Assistant Secretary William McChesney Martin, a former president of the New York Stock Exchange, who would soon be named himself as the new chairman of the Federal Reserve Board. Appointed in 1951, Martin held the chairmanship through five presidential elections.

The initial impact of the Accord was quite small—a slight upward creep in interest rates. Within two years, however, Martin and other Federal Reserve officials claimed for themselves a more sweeping interpretation of the Treasury-Fed agreement—it was, they attested, a declaration of full independence for the central bank. By that point, the liberal Democrats were gone from the White House, defeated by Dwight Eisenhower in 1952. The Democratic policy makers who wanted easy credit and low rates were replaced by conservative Republicans who shared the Fed’s anxieties about “sound money” and supported higher interest rates.

Esoteric as it sounded, the Accord became a crucial juncture in the life of the Federal Reserve—and the course of the postwar economy. In practice, the Fed did become independent again. The central bank no longer felt required to hold interest rates down or to follow the executive branch’s direction. The independent Federal Reserve would ease or tighten, whenever it thought necessary. The price of money rose steadily in subsequent years, directly influenced by supply-and-demand perceptions in the financial marketplace and by nudges from the Fed. “Our purpose,” as William McChesney Martin put it, “is to lean against the winds of deflation or inflation, whichever way they are blowing.”

Martin’s relentless critic, Representative Wright Patman, described the consequences somewhat differently. “The Federal Reserve,” Patman complained, “would spend the next ten years sending interest rates in orbit.”9

The new Federal Reserve chairman was disarmingly witty, capable of neutralizing political attacks with blunt colloquialisms. The Fed’s main role, William McChesney Martin once confessed cheerfully, was “to take away the punch bowl just when the party gets going.” His liberal critics howled at the thought. That, they complained, is precisely what William McChesney Martin did during the 1950s—blunting the postwar expansion with high interest rates so that the economy never reached its full potential.

From the other side, conservative critics of the monetarist school complained that the central bank operated with baffling imprecision, leaning this way or that, dampening credit or easing, with no clear definition of what guided its decisions. “There was essentially no discussion of how to determine which way the relevant wind was blowing,” Milton Friedman and Anna Schwartz wrote.

Martin’s eclectic approach and his self-confident style muffled the blows. He fenced energetically with Wright Patman at congressional hearings and responded amiably, if sometimes opaquely, to scholarly questions. But the Federal Reserve’s management never became the decisive political question that critics demanded. Inflation was moderate, the 1950s were bountiful and the general public was not much interested in abstract economic debates. During Martin’s tenure, the central bank was able to recede further into its own mystique. The subject was too vague and complicated for most people to understand; money seemed too remote from politics to become a serious source of controversy. .

Many years after his retirement, Martin reminisced with good humor about the mysteries of his institution. When he took office as chairman, he told himself: “My gracious, here I am the new chairman of the Fed and I’m doing my best—I’m not the brightest fellow in the world but I’m working hard on this—and I haven’t the faintest idea of how you control the money supply. Yet everyone thinks I have it at my fingertips.”10

Martin’s frequent warnings about the dangers of imminent inflation seemed precious in hindsight. The Fed’s anxiety, however, repeatedly interrupted the postwar expansion. Three recessions occurred during the prosperous years of the Eisenhower Presidency, and the Fed was directly responsible for at least two of them. In 1953, when the inflation rate was less than 1 percent, the Fed imposed a drastic tightening on money markets; then it reversed itself—too late to avoid a recession in 1954. Four years later, the Fed began leaning the other way, expanding money rapidly to head off a contraction. But it was too late again—a brief and mild recession occurred anyway. Exactly two years later, in April 1960, the economic recovery was halted, one of the shortest on record, and another recession began—six months after the Fed had virtually stopped growth in the money supply.

Whatever else liberal critics might say against Martin’s cautious stewardship of money, they could hardly accuse him of trying to help the incumbent Republicans. All three recessions in the 1950s occurred during election years. The higher unemployment helped Democrats take away Republicans’ seats in Congress—and eventually the White House. Vice President Richard M. Nixon had urged the Eisenhower Cabinet to push Martin for easier credit during his 1960 campaign for President. After the election, Nixon called on Martin at the Fed and told him precisely whom he blamed for his defeat—the Federal Reserve.

The “New Economics” that triumphed during the Kennedy-Johnson years was a blunt reversal of the political climate surrounding the Fed —an optimistic declaration that the stodgy conservatives of the Eisenhower era had underrated America’s potential. During his campaign, John F. Kennedy obliquely criticized the Fed itself, but his winning theme conveyed the essence: a promise “to get the country moving again.” The liberal indictment of Federal Reserve policy was spelled out in more detail by Wright Patman, among others: excessively tight money had nearly doubled the interest rates on government bonds over the preceding decade, from 2.3 percent in 1950 to 4 percent in 1960. Yet unemployment had crept steadily higher, approaching 6 percent, and the nation’s economy was operating far below its capacity. Inflation, meanwhile, was a bogus fear—prices were rising at the unthreatening rate of only 1.5 percent in 1960.

It has become painfully clear [Patman declared! that the monetary policy carried out by the Fed was not sufficiently expansionist to keep the country moving at a rate justified by the increase in the working force and the industrial capacity. . . . Interest rates have climbed steadily, with slight interruptions, during the entire post-Accord period. The period has been marked, then, by a continual shift of income to the banks, other major financial institutions and individuals with significant interest income. The rest of the country provided this income.

Patman was a distinctive critic because he was one of the very few politicians, even among liberal Democrats, who were willing to attack the money question on old-fashioned terms—the gross redistribution of income that flowed from higher interest rates, shifting wealth from the many to the few. For this, Patman was called the “last Populist,” a label that mixed nostalgia with derision. In an era of general abundance, his attacks on bankers and high interest rates were dismissed as cranky demagoguery from the distant past. Interest rates were now regarded as a question to be resolved by scientific management and natural market forces, not by the raw politics that pitted haves against have-nots.

But Patman’s complaints also spoke to the broader economic goal articulated by John Kennedy and his Keynesian advisers. “By instituting a high interest policy,” Patman explained, “a country chooses to grow more slowly than it otherwise could.” The economic policy launched by Kennedy and fully implemented by Lyndon Johnson asked monetary policy to stand aside or at least not to interfere with the increased growth that an activist fiscal policy would make possible.

Patman foresaw inevitable conflict between the two—the government’s fiscal policy versus the government’s monetary policy. “As things stand now,” he warned, “economic policy making is run like a dual-control car driven by two drivers, one of whom insists on his independent right to use his own brakes and accelerator as he and he alone sees fit. It is pure luck if the motor is not constantly stalling. To say the least, that is a most inefficient way to get anywhere.”11

The New Economics worked. As the Kennedy-Johnson tax cuts and spending increases delivered more aggregate demand to drive the economy, it seemed for a time as though economists really could “fine tune” endless prosperity. For 106 months, from February 1961 to December 1969, the nation enjoyed its longest era of uninterrupted economic expansion. The stock market soared in a long bull market, driven by rising corporate profits, and workers enjoyed steady real growth in personal incomes and declining unemployment. In a generous mood, the national government expanded its commitment to help those who were left out of capitalism’s growing bounty—the poor and elderly and racial minorities.

As the nation approached full employment, a discreet combat developed between the White House and the Federal Reserve. Martin and his colleagues worried that when the economy reached its full capacity and could no longer absorb rapid growth, then the natural law of supply and demand would produce inflation, as various markets bid up prices for scarce materials and wages for scarce labor. The Fed tried to restrain without provoking open conflict; the White House leaned on the Fed to be more accommodative. The clash became public briefly in late 1965 when Lyndon Johnson summoned Martin to his ranch for a melodramatic lecture on the danger of raising the Discount rate.

The White House economic advisers devoted considerable energy —and memo writing—to the question of whether the Fed chairman was “on the team.” They also selected new governors for the Federal Reserve Board who would be more liberal and perhaps pull Martin in their direction. When Lyndon Johnson was thinking of replacing Martin as Fed chairman in 1967, Gardner Ackley of the CEA sent the President a reassuring memo. Ackley had talked privately to other Fed governors and was assured that “Bill [Martin] was increasingly becoming a follower of the ‘New Economics.’ . . . Now that the ‘New Economics’ is firmly in the saddle in both places, Bill can be counted on to cooperate.”12

Martin and his colleagues did periodically resist the inflationary impulse from the pumped-up federal spending, but not as forcefully as some wanted. Philip Coldwell, then president of the Dallas Fed, said:

The System attempted to fight back, but in those days a dramatic event was when you raised the Discount rate a quarter of one percent. You just didn’t attempt a swing in interest rates big enough to contain those pressures. . . .

Johnson set the Fed up for the blame if anything went wrong. That’s all

right. Every President has to have a scapegoat. His argument was that the economy is very flexible and the Fed shouldn’t be stiff-necked. It was perfectly all right for him to triple spending for arms—because he wanted the Fed to monetize the debt. A number of us on the Federal Open Market Committee argued very strongly that we should have greater restraint. But others were saying, “Well, we are in a war and we have to support the war effort,” We never did it.

In fact, the New Economics was already unraveling, but not because of William McChesney Martin or the Fed. The hubris that led the United States into the war in Indochina may have also infected some liberal economists. The chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers, Arthur Okun, boasted in 1968: “When recessions were a regular feature of the economic environment, they were often viewed as inevitable. . . . Recessions are now generally considered fundamentally preventable, like airplane crashes and unlike hurricanes.”13

Yet, by 1968, the confident managers of the economy had already waited too long to take the necessary measures that their own Keynesian doctrine prescribed—raising taxes or reducing spending in order to dampen aggregate demand and avoid an overheated economy.

Paul Volcker was one who recognized the error early. In the autumn of 1965, after he had resigned as Deputy Under Secretary at Treasury and returned to Wall Street banking, Volcker sent an anguished memo to his former boss, Treasury Secretary Henry Fowler. Volcker’s message, as he paraphrased it from memory, was: “My God, if taxes aren’t increased now, the whole of the New Economics is going to be in disrepute.”

Volcker was a “team player,” sharing the Administration’s goals, but not entirely swept away by its presumptions.

It is almost impossible to reconstruct the mood, but there was a feeling of exuberance in the economics profession [he recalled], because it really thought it had the business of the cycle of boom-and-bust licked. Everyone was caught .up in it, though I don’t think I shared it entirely. But I was from a different background, more financially oriented, and in the Treasury we were naturally more cautious than the advisers in the White House.”14

The crucible for Keynesian economics came early in the war, as Volcker’s memo suggested, when military costs escalated rapidly alongside the Great Society’s new spending commitments for domestic programs. The test was whether the managers of the New Economics, politicians and economists, had the steel to do the hard part—restraining fiscal policy when inflationary pressures became evident in the economy. It was one thing to ask Congress to cut taxes and increase spending, not exactly a sacrificial act for elected politicians. But would they be willing to do the reverse when the economy required it? The answer was, they would not. In American politics, the Keynesian idea seemed to work fine on the upside, but it couldn’t work at all on the downside.

The political flaw was fundamental, though at the time it was blamed on the deceit and evasion of Lyndon Johnson. The President first concealed the true costs of the Vietnam War, then stalled when his advisers urged him to raise taxes. When Congress finally enacted a tax surcharge in 1968, it was too little, too late. Arthur Okun, one of the leading Keynesians, described the liberal debacle as the “defeat of the New Economics by the old politics.”15

The Keynesian failure, however, was larger than one President’s foibles or the budget dilemma created by war in Vietnam. A postmortem by John Kenneth Galbraith described in fundamental terms why the political system found itself unable to follow the Keynesian rule. The composition of federal spending had changed drastically since the 1930s, for one thing, and now included a large and permanent base of Cold War military expenditures plus the maturing commitments of New Deal social-welfare programs. Both types of spending, practically speaking, were not subject to discretionary reductions. In an increasingly unpopular war, the famous debate between “guns and butter” was left unresolved: the people got both. Tax revenues, likewise, were not as flexible as the New Deal reformers had supposed. “An increase in taxes at a time when prices are rising appears to all but the most enlightened citizens as a peculiarly gratuitous action,” Galbraith observed. “More is being paid for goods; now the government adds insult to injury with higher taxes.”

The political reality, confirmed in later years by subsequent episodes of congressional inaction and presidential evasion, was that the New Economics could not keep its promises. “If taxes cannot be increased except under the force majeure of war and public expenditures cannot be decreased much for any reason,” Galbraith concluded, “it follows that Keynesian policy is unavailable for limiting demand. It can expand purchasing power but it cannot contract it. . . . The goals were there; the instruments for reaching them were becoming distressingly inoperative.”

The failure of fiscal policy left it to monetary policy to do the nasty chore. By 1968, price moderation had disappeared; inflation was approaching 5 percent. The “war tax” belatedly enacted by Congress in the election year failed to restrain the overstimulated economy. In early 1968, members of the Federal Open Market Committee fought privately for months over how tough they should be—and the “hardliners” lost to Martin and the moderates. By 1969, with the Democrats defeated and Richard Nixon in the White House, the inflation rate was above 6 percent.

The Federal Reserve asserted itself again. When the Fed tightened money and credit more vigorously in 1969, monetary control proved to be more effective than the limited fiscal restraint that had been tried (persuading more young economists that Professor Friedman was right and their liberal teachers were wrong—money did matter, powerfully). The confirming evidence was the new recession that began late in 1969, the first contraction in more than eight years.

The 1970 recession was different. Unemployment rose, as expected, but price inflation did not recede proportionately. When the recession ended, both aggravations persisted together—high unemployment and steadily rising prices. Economists called the puzzling combination “stagflation.” Politicians argued over which affliction bothered the public more.

The era of confident economic management was over. Richard Nixon, among other misfortunes in his Presidency, had the bad luck to announce his conversion to the Keynesian orthodoxy at the very moment when that doctrine was eclipsed by new realities.

If historians searched for the precise date on which America’s singular dominance of the world’s economy ended, they might settle on August 15, 1971. On that day, President Nixon abruptly changed the monetary rules under which nations had traded with one another for twenty-five years. From World War II onward, the United States was the wealthiest, most productive and most stable of the competing economies in the world. Its currency, the dollar, was the guarantee for everyone of order and stability in international trade and finance. President Nixon’s announcement, without saying so explicitly, meant the dollar was now too weak to lead.

In the United States, the next-day headlines and political reaction focused mainly on Nixon’s dramatic domestic measures, the imposition of wage and price controls to brake inflation. But the truly historic content was his decision that the United States would no longer honor the terms of the Bretton Woods agreement, the arrangement that had stabilized the exchange of foreign currencies since 1946 by pegging them to the dollar. Nixon’s decision was a momentous change, sowing global controversy and economic dislocation over the next fifteen years.

Paul Volcker, Nixon’s Treasury Under Secretary for Monetary Policy and International Affairs, was on a plane to Europe that night, off to reassure foreign central bankers and finance ministers. “We had to have a breathing space,” Volcker said, “but I looked hopefully for a reconstruction of the orderly system.” He would spend the next two years in globe-trotting negotiations, trying to patch back together the orderly system of international currency exchange, but the efforts failed. Afterward, Volcker saw the breakdown of Bretton Woods in larger terms: it was a failure of American leadership, an unwillingness to confront the nation’s economic excesses and to impose selfdiscipline.

The essence of foreign exchange, when all the daunting complexities were set aside, was an ancient quarrel among trading nations— how to keep everyone honest, how to ensure that a nation’s money actually had the value it claimed. A government willing to water its own currency by inflation could gain enormous windfalls at the expense of other nations—both in currency exchange and in trade advantages. A sound coin would be exchanged in trade for a dishonest one. Country-to-country disputes over relative currency values were older than capitalism itself. For centuries, the neutral arbiter had been gold, a precious substance that did not lose intrinsic value and, unlike paper money, could not be manufactured at will.

Every nation understood that international trade needed a system of mutual discipline, for temptation was always present. By manipulating its money values, a government could win large markets overseas for its exporters and thus create satisfaction at home with expanding production and employment. If, for example, France’s money was normally valued at five francs to the American dollar, a $4 bushel of wheat from Nebraska sold for 20 francs in Paris. A bottle of perfume worth 100 francs in Lyon sold for $20 in New York. Then, suppose, an inept or capricious or scheming French government watered the value of its own national currency drastically, reducing the actual value of francs by 25 percent. Its francs would be worth less at home as price inflation resulted, but the $4 wheat exported from America would now be effectively priced in France at $5—a boon to the grain farmers of Normandy who had to compete with U.S. agriculture. Likewise, the French perfume could now be exported profitably to the U.S. at a much cheaper price, perhaps as low at $15 a bottle. That would stimulate sales in American stores and take market shares away from competing brands.

In global financial markets, where currency traders were alert to every slight and imagined deviation in money values, the French manipulation would set off protective action, probably long before the effects on trade were so obvious. Investors would rush to get out of any financial asset, bonds or stocks or currency itself, that was denominated in unreliable francs and losing its real value. They would shift their wealth to assets in other currencies, dollars or yen or Deutsche marks, whose value was stable or increasing. These shifts of capital wealth across the international spectrum of currencies often exacerbated the trade imbalance—the increased demand for dollars and dollar-denominated investments would push up the international price of dollars and weaken the franc further.

Foreign-exchange arguments flowed constantly through both finance and trade, reflected daily in the changing prices on international currency markets, where banks, corporations, large investors and even governments bid on their own estimates of reality. However, the value of any nation’s money in international transactions was not ultimately determined by currency traders in New York or London or Tokyo. The foreign-exchange value of a currency reflected how that nation conducted its own domestic economic policy. Was it being responsible or spending beyond its means? Was it buying and borrowing more than it could really afford, expanding its money supply more than was justified and inflating the currency? What most Americans saw as an arcane subject for international economists really originated in their own behavior at home and in Washington.

The Bretton Woods treaty, devised in 1944 by Keynes and his American counterpart, Harry Dexter White, used the dollar as the disciplinary system to punish dishonest currencies—and the ultimate enforcer was gold. The value of the franc, the pound, the Deutsche mark, the lira and other currencies was fixed at agreed-upon ratios to the American dollar. If Britain or France or any other country watered the value of its currency, it would be forced back into line by the fixed exchange value with the dollar. In extremis, the wayward nation could be compelled to redeem its francs or pounds in gold, not at the watered-down value, but at the fixed value against the American dollar. To cushion the process, the International Monetary Fund was created as a financial pool for short-term loans among nations. Instead of shipping gold, a nation could draw funds temporarily from the IMF to settle its foreign accounts while its government worked to get its domestic house in order.

The dollar was the rock of certainty for all nations, just as the British pound sterling had imposed stability in the nineteenth century when Britain’s economy dominated world trade. And gold kept the dollar honest. To guarantee the dollar’s own constancy, the United States agreed to pay gold for dollars (at $35 to the ounce) whenever any foreign government had accumulated a surplus of dollars and wished to exchange them. Every other currency was anchored to the dollar and the dollar was anchored to gold.

What Richard Nixon did on August 15 was to “close the gold window.” The United States unilaterally declared it would no longer pay out gold for dollars in foreign exchange. The reassuring guarantee was suspended—temporarily, Nixon said at the time, but permanently, as it turned out. For more than a generation, the dollar had imposed discipline on the rest of the world, but now the dollar itself was unreliable. What happens when the rock itself crumbles?

In the short term, Nixon did not have good choices. The United States had been paying out billions in gold for foreign claimants for more than a decade, and the reserves stored at Fort Knox had rapidly depleted. By 1971, foreign financial institutions had amassed dollar claims totaling $36 billion—double the $18 billion in gold reserves the United States still held for international convertibility. If the President let events play out, the guarantor of world monetary order—the American government—would soon find its own storehouse empty. Its guarantee to the world would become meaningless by default.

In broader terms, the crisis reflected the consequences both of American success and of the excesses of its domestic inflation. The United States, undamaged by World War II and much stronger for it, had led the industrial world to spectacular recovery (while it also paid most of the cost of military defense for the non-Communist alliance). Western Europe and Japan were rebuilt. American dollars spread around the globe for foreign aid, corporate investment and trade. Just as the dollar became the dominant currency used in trade by everyone, American interests dominated international commerce. For two decades, the United States supplied generous foreign aid and exported capital for global development, expenditures a wealthy nation could easily afford. Compared with the destructive turmoil that followed World War I, the American hegemony after World War II was brilliantly effective.

By the late 1960s, however, all these factors matured into real problems—just when the New Economics was allowing America’s price inflation to take off at home. The industrial allies were no longer weak and malleable, but aggressive competitors for world markets. The buildup of exported dollars—now known as Eurodollars—became a permanent alternative source of finance, interacting with America’s domestic money supply and complicating control over it. The annual trade deficits had built up a backlog of real economic claims—claims that could be satisfied ultimately only if Americans sold more abroad and bought less themselves or if they surrendered their store of immutable wealth, the gold at Fort Knox.

For two years, the Nixon Administration struggled to make adjustments that would restore the old order and allow the dollar to resume its role as the fixed star in the international constellation of currencies. In December 1971, after intense negotiations with foreign finance ministers and central bankers, Nixon devalued the dollar 7.9 percent (now an ounce of gold would be worth $38). Other nations agreed grudgingly to revalue their own currencies at higher levels, thus further reducing the dollar’s. But the imbalances continued and so did the market pressures of a weakening dollar. Early in 1973, the government devalued the dollar again (now pegged to gold at $42 an ounce, an 11 percent devaluation).

Finally, by March 1973, exhausted and unable to keep the international bargaining alive, officials conceded that the old order was dead beyond resurrection. The U.S gold guarantee was permanently abandoned and so were the fixed exchange ratios among the other major currencies. Henceforth, a dollar would find its own value in the currency markets. So would the franc, the yen, the pound and all others. Fixed exchanged rates were replaced by a system of “floating exchange.” A dollar was still a dollar, but its international value would fluctuate daily, depending on the judgments by millions of economic players on what a dollar was really worth compared with other kinds of money.

Paul Volcker was at the table throughout the saga of retreat and unraveling (and would be stigmatized somewhat unfairly among central bankers for his role in dismantling the certitude of the dollar backed by gold). Volcker himself, however, was a reluctant advocate of the new system of floating exchange rates. He proposed alternatives but could not persuade the political leaders.

I didn’t think floating was a good policy, though obviously we did some contingency planning for it [he said]. I was concerned as an economist about it because it conveniently removes the need for interned economic discipline to protect the external value of the currency. But I also thought of our political situation in the world. You couldn’t just walk in and say, “We have a system that has been operating pretty well for twenty-five years, but we’ve decided to change it.”

The United States wasn’t in extremis, and I believed that floating would be a tremendous source of political tension. But you have to remember that a half or even two-thirds of the academic community were in favor and so were some people on Capitol Hill and in the Administration.

Milton Friedman, among others, was triumphant. Conservative monetarists saw floating exchange rates as an excellent free-market solution—let the private markets decide the value of the dollar. Their judgments, based on hard facts in the marketplace rather than on political sentiment, would force the government to behave. More importantly, Friedman argued, the Federal Reserve would at last be free to concentrate solely on the one thing it could control—the domestic money supply. Monetarists wanted the central bank to ignore the international complications—all else would fall into place if only the Fed got its domestic money regulation right. In practice, their promise was never fulfilled. Floating exchange rates produced, instead, an era of constantly shifting currency values that meant perpetual instability in the terms of trade among nations.

These subtleties were lost on the President who made the choice. “Poor old Nixon,” Volcker said, “was not a deep thinker in these matters. He had no intellectual conviction about floating. His position was, ‘You tell me which rules you want to play under, fixed or floating, and I’ll play it that way, but you’re to make sure the best interests of the United States are taken care of.’”

Indeed, from abroad, the abandonment of the U.S. gold guarantee looked like a blunt political gambit—a way to hang on to American hegemony when the fundamentals were going against the United States. With floating rates, the dollar would continue its decline through the 1970s as U.S. inflation escalated, and this trend was vastly stimulating for American export industries, including agriculture, at the expense of their foreign competitors. Advocates of the floating system would argue that, though it would take several years, the free-market approach would finally force the United States to discipline itself. The process finally began, they would argue, when Paul Volcker took office in 1979 and imposed his tight-money regime.

In the meantime, floating exchange rates permanently destabilized global commerce, creating artificial advantages and real losses almost at random. Currency values were pushed back and forth in unpredictable ways that no business executive could reasonably foresee. Every multinational corporation became, perforce, a gambler in currency markets. The American devaluation, furthermore, altered real returns for everyone else conducting international transactions in dollars.

The immediate consequence was dramatic and frightening. In the fall of 1973, six months after the dollar was permanently “floated,” the oil-producing nations of OPEC quadrupled the price of crude oil. Americans blamed the higher gasoline prices on greedy Arab sheiks, but, in truth, they could have justly blamed their own government’s monetary policy. The OPEC price escalation was a direct and logical response to Nixon’s fateful decision. Oil traded worldwide in dollars, and if the United States was going to permit a free fall in the dollar’s value, that meant the oil-producing nations would receive less and less real value for their commodity. The dollar had already lost one-third of its value in only half a dozen years and seemed headed toward even steeper decline. In substantial measure, Saudi Arabia and the other OPEC nations were grabbing back what they had already lost—and tacking extra dollars on the price to protect themselves against future U.S. inflation. The Wall Street Journal observed: “OPEC got all the credit for what the U.S. had mainly done to itself.”16

The abrupt run-up of oil prices fed instant inflation into the price of everything else. Poorer nations that could not pay the bills borrowed heavily—the “recycling” of petrodollars by major banks. Banks collected the deposits of revenue-rich OPEC governments and lent the money to developing nations so they could avoid bankruptcy and keep their economies growing. The global system adjusted to the trauma and carried on, much better than many had expected, but the dynamics were different. A game of money combat had now been established among nations—a contest to protect narrow self-interests in a newly precarious world.

Paul Volcker speculated that it might have turned out differently if there had been sufficient political will in the United States. The old system might have survived if the U.S. had been willing to restrain its own domestic economy—the discipline of higher interest rates and higher unemployment, less spending and slower growth—until the dollar was stabilized. On the other hand, America’s ability to dominate the other economies of the world was inevitably waning. Although America was still the wealthiest and most powerful nation, its luxurious margin for error and excess was becoming much smaller.

When Richard Nixon was elected President in 1968, he innocently assumed he could immediately appoint his own chairman for the Federal Reserve Board. William McChesney Martin, who had held the job for nearly twenty years, informed the President-elect that he was mistaken. Martin’s term did not expire until early 1970, a year after Nixon’s Inaugural, and Martin said he intended to serve out his time. The Fed chairman, in the President’s mind, was the man responsible for his first political defeat, in 1960. The President’s displeasure deepened in 1969 as the Federal Reserve tightened credit forcefully, despite White House complaints, and the nation entered recession late in the year. On January 31, 1970, Nixon was finally able to put his own man in charge of money and credit and presided proudly as the oath for the new Federal Reserve chairman was administered to his longtime adviser, Arthur F. Burns. Nixon wished Burns success in his new job, then added a touch of deadly-serious humor.

“I respect his independence,” the President assured the audience gathered at the White House. “However, I hope that independently he will conclude that my views are the ones that should be followed.” The audience applauded vigorously. Nixon smiled and turned to the new Fed chairman. “You see, Dr. Burns, that is a standing vote for lower interest rates and more money.”

Burns, as it happened, delivered promptly. Two weeks later, presiding at his first meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee, Burns argued forcefully that the weak economy needed a substantial and overt easing of credit. In the first “go-round” of discussion, when governors and Reserve Bank presidents expressed their preferences informally, the majority favored only a moderate relaxing of credit. On the final vote, after Burns reiterated his strong convictions, the majority voted with him, 8 to 4, and the Fed provided the “lower interest rates and more money” that the President wanted.

Inside the Fed, Arthur Burns would be both admired and despised for his force of character. Unlike Martin, he was blunt and blustery, an autocratic leader who trampled on the traditional “collegial atmosphere” of the Board of Governors. As a Columbia University economist and former Eisenhower adviser, Burns had credentials and intellect that were not questioned, but his bullying manner was. He could be cruel, associates said, humiliating staff economists with nasty remarks on their competence. He was also capable of shamelessly juggling the monetary numbers—deliberately mismatching interest rates with money-growth projections—in order to achieve an FOMC consensus for the policy directive.

“Arthur just hated dissents,” Governor Philip Coldwell said. “I guess it wasn’t three months after I came on the board, I threw a dissent at him, along with Alfred Hayes, president of the New York bank. For the next five meetings, A1 Hayes and I would be brought into Arthur’s office beforehand for little prep sessions—a lecture from Arthur on the importance of consensus.”

Outside the Fed, Burns won an exalted reputation as the stern enemy of inflation. He delivered many eloquent lectures on the subject, scolding Congress and other audiences for their lack of selfdiscipline. Among his colleagues at the Fed, however, there was considerable cynicism about the chairman’s pious rhetoric. If it was fair to indict the central bank for regularly yielding to inflation over a period of years, for failing to resist the short-term political pressures for economic growth, then Arthur Burns was as guilty as any chairman. When he took office in 1970, inflation was running above 5 percent. Eight years later, when he left, despite a long and severe recession in 1974, the inflation rate was headed toward 9 percent and higher. His stewardship was recorded indelibly in America’s prices: the Consumer Price Index was at 116 when Burns took charge of the central bank. When he retired, the price index was at 195 and rising. His reputation as an inflation fighter seemed to inflate right along with the value of money. In retirement, Arthur Burns began lecturing on the “anguish of central banking.”

An uglier accusation surrounded his tenure—the conclusion, shared especially among Democratic politicians, that Arthur Burns had deliberately manipulated monetary policy in order to help re-elect his old friend Richard Nixon. Burns and his fellow governors strenuously denied it, including governors who had opposed Burns’s policy persuasions at the time. If Burns made mistakes in 1972, and the governors all agreed that he did, the mistakes were based on honest convictions about where the economy was headed, not partisan bias. No one, of course, could definitively settle questions of motivation, but politicians could interpret the evidence for themselves: when Arthur Burns erred, his errors were all tipped in the same direction— providing a prosperous climate for Richard Nixon’s re-election campaign.

Nixon’s White House staff, which liked to play “hardball” with both its allies and its adversaries, did not trust Burns to deliver on his own, and in the year before the re-election season, they threw several blunt messages at him. Early in 1971, concerned that the new Fed chairman was behaving as independently as the old one, two White House staff members called on Burns separately and told him what the President wanted—money expansion that would allow the economy to reach full employment by 1972. Burns protested that their behavior was improper and he complained to the President. That summer, the White House managers fired another “shot across the Fed Chairman’s bow,” as one presidential aide put it. A fictitious story was planted in the press that Burns had asked for a $20,000 pay raise at the same time he was urging wage and price controls for the rest of the nation. The story also claimed the President was considering a proposal to double the size of the Federal Reserve Board—a not-very-subtle threat to dilute the chairman’s power.17

The tactics were crude, but Nixon’s broad political strategy for 1972 was brilliantly successful. The President’s popular standing and his re-election prospects were being undermined by the new and puzzling performance of the economy—a listless recovery in which both unemployment and inflation lingered on at awkwardly high levels. Nixon’s strategy was to pump up the economy for the campaign year with larger federal deficits while keeping a lid on inflation by imposing wage and price controls. In August 1971, the President announced the controls—freezing the rising prices that were so troublesome. Simultaneously, the Nixon Administration embraced a stimulative fiscal policy—increased federal spending that would drive the economy faster. Thus, for the short run at least, voters would enjoy relief from both afflictions—inflation and unemployment—in time for the 1972 elections. To succeed, however, the strategy depended upon a cooperative Federal Reserve.

The Fed must be willing to provide “a rate of monetary expansion sufficient to move the economy up on the desired path,” as Nixon explained in his memoirs. “The word went out that 1972, by God, was going to be a very good year,” confessed a high official at Treasury, where Paul Volcker was in charge of monetary policy.

The Federal Reserve came through. Money growth, which averaged only 3.2 percent a month in the last quarter of 1971, jumped to a monthly average of 11 percent in the first quarter of the election year. Given the usual time lag of monetary stimulus, generosity in winter meant the economy would respond robustly by the summer and fall. Overall, the Fed permitted money expansion throughout 1972 that was about 25 percent faster than the year before. The Federal Funds rate crept upward slightly, but the Federal Reserve Board did not raise the Discount rate. The Discount rate was lowered to 4.5 percent and-held there until after the election, despite repeated pleas for increases. During 1972, the Board of Governors rejected twenty-two recommendations from the various Federal Reserve Banks for an increase in the Discount rate.

Inside the Federal Open Market Committee, Arthur Burns argued repeatedly with his colleagues through the spring and summer about the potential consequences of their policy. A determined minority warned him that a new breakout of inflation was ahead in 1973 if the Federal Reserve did not apply restraint now. The White House, they pointed out, was already hinting that price controls would be lifted early the next year. Once the regulatory lid was taken off prices, an inflationary burst would surely follow—fueled by the generous money policy that preceded it. Their warnings, expressed in minutes of the FOMC meetings through 1972, proved to be an accurate forecast of what did occur after Nixon’s electoral victory.

In meeting after meeting, however, Arthur Burns successfully stared them down. At one point, according to the minutes, the chairman answered their anxieties by remarking that “he was not afraid of prosperity.” Unemployment was still relatively high, Burns observed, and he did not see an “economic boom” ahead. Each time the argument was joined, a distinguished minority voted against Burns’s direction, including a spectrum of governors from the conservative Philip Cold well to the more liberal Andrew F. Brimmer. Each time, the chairman prevailed. The Fed declined to tighten forcefully.

By August, when the portents of future inflation were even more evident, the dissenters tried again. Andrew Brimmer expressed the worry that some comments made by Burns and others about “constraints on interest rates” might “be interpreted as suggesting political constraints.” Brimmer hoped that was not the intended message.

No, Burns assured him, he did not mean to suggest there were any “political constraints” on the Fed’s policy. “Nevertheless,” the chairman added, “the Federal Reserve System was a part of the government.” He meant this: the President’s anti-inflation controls did not apply to interest rates (though lenders were urged to follow voluntary guidelines). However, if the Fed pushed up rates, that might provoke an outcry for mandatory controls on credit too. “In the circumstances,” Burns warned, “the Federal Reserve should not be eager to raise interest rates.” A majority of the Federal Open Market Committee yielded to this logic and its implication of political repercussions. The majority did not wish to tempt collision with Richard Nixon’s reelection strategy.18

And 1972 was a very good year. Inflation was held in check while unemployment declined steadily. The government accelerated its distribution of benefit checks to families and happy citizens spent the money. Real disposable income per capita, the best statistical indicator of voter satisfaction with the economy, rose by a robust 3.3 percent. America seemed headed in the right direction again. In November, Richard Nixon won re-election in a historic landslide. And, for the next ten years, Federal Reserve governors would labor, with scant success, to convince skeptics that the Fed’s policy errors of 1972 were not based on politics.

The American public felt the eventual consequences, even if it was unaware of the causes. For 1973 was a very bad year. As the Nixon Administration phased out its controls, prices renewed their escalation. The embattled dollar weakened further on international-exchange markets and the U.S. government abandoned its two-year struggle to stabilize it. In the fall, the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries responded to the devaluation of its dollar income by employing the long-threatened “oil weapon”—a boycott that traumatized Americans with lines at their gas stations and quadrupled oil prices, feeding naturally into higher prices for nearly every other product. The U.S. inflation rate reached 8.8 percent in 1973, more than doubled from the previous year, and would rise above 12 percent. For its part, the Federal Reserve pushed up interest rates—trying to restrain the boom it had helped to stimulate the year before. By November of 1973, confronted by tight money and the “oil shock” from OPEC, the economy sank into contraction.

The nation had not experienced anything like it since the 1930s. Industrial production shrank by nearly 15 percent. Unemployment accumulated each month for nearly a year and a half, reaching a peak of 9.1 percent, nearly 8 million workers without jobs. In all, the economy’s output declined in size by nearly 6 percent. As the contraction continued, price inflation eventually began to moderate, yet it hardly went away. As the buildup of idle labor and surplus goods retarded wage and price increases, the inflation fell from above 12 percent to below 5 percent. But that left inflation still well above the inflationary conditions that had prompted Richard Nixon to impose controls in 1971. There seemed to be a new plateau of distress in which neither unemployment nor inflation subsided to “normal.”

Arthur Burns and the Federal Reserve got more than their share of the blame. Once the contraction was under way, the central bank allowed it to take its course, hoping that as the recession deepened, it would break the curve of runaway inflation. After nine months or so, the Fed began easing money and credit modestly, but without much effect. The recession finally ended in March 1975 and, even then, the recovery was painfully slow.

Frustrated congressional critics zeroed in on Burns, their anger heightened by the partisan overtones of the 1972 performance. Democrats, for instance, proposed a congressional directive early in 1975, ordering the Fed to provide “substantially higher” money growth. “Congress has received expert evidence,” the resolution declared, “that money supply growth of nearly 9 percent per year in mid-1972 and mid-1973 contributed to the present inflation and the barely 2 percent per year in the second half of 1974 as contributing to the recession and increase in unemployment and the decline of gross national product.”





Burns objected testily to Senator William Proxmire of Wisconsin, one of the sponsors. “I think it is most unfortunate and, if I may say so, shortsighted and even unfair on your part, Senator, to suggest, as the resolution does, that the Federal Reserve is largely responsible for the ills of this country,” Burns said.

“We do not say that,” Proxmire replied. “We say ‘contributed.’” “You do not mention anybody else,” Burns snapped. “You do not mention what Congress has contributed or what the President has contributed or what business firms have contributed.”19

Burns, for his part, tightened up on Fed secrecy. He abolished the long-standing practice of keeping verbatim minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee meetings. These minutes were normally kept secret until five years had elapsed—and were unlikely to embarrass anyone so long after the fact. Even so, they were the only record of who said what in the private policy meetings, the central bank’s only decent accounting for history of how it had determined policy for money and credit. Arthur Burns discontinued the practice. In the future, the Federal Reserve’s secret deliberations would remain secret forever. FOMC minutes were reduced to mere summaries of its meetings.

“The word ‘sordid’ is probably too strong,” a former aide to the chairman reflected, “but what Burns did immediately after Jimmy Carter’s election in terms of monetary policy can be documented. There was a rapid shift in monetary policy and it was designed to ingratiate Burns with Carter so he would be reappointed chairman.”

The records did indicate that shortly after the election of 1976 the Federal Reserve eased. The Discount rate was cut and money growth accelerated smartly. In fairness to Burns, the same evidence demonstrated that he did not play political games to help re-elect Gerald Ford. The recovery that began in 1975 was frustratingly slow, but as the economy gradually gathered momentum, Ford’s prospects steadily improved. He lost narrowly in the end—without the extra monetary stimulus that might have put him over the top.

Burns was a Republican, appointed by a Republican President. According to one Fed associate, he “wanted desperately to be reappointed by a Democrat and go down in history like Bill Martin as a bipartisan chairman.” Like Martin, Burns had one more year to serve before the new Democratic President could appoint a chairman to a new four-year term. During that year, Burns discreetly courted key members of the Carter Administration, hoping to win their friendship and approval.

A memorandum from one staff aide advised the Fed chairman in November 1977:

Carter can be seduced . . . reappointment would make Carter out to be a high-minded statesman, would reassure the national and international financial and business communities, would rally financial markets, etc. . . .

Carter will have to be reassured that, if you are reappointed, you will not continue to publicly criticize everything that is near and dear to him.

. . . Any seduction program would have to reassure the President that you won’t criticize him publicly every six months.

The courtship failed. Carter and the liberals in his White House, particularly Vice President Walter Mondale, distrusted Burns on several levels. They were not about to take the risk of letting him control money and interest rates during their term in office. In early 1978, Carter appointed G. William Miller, chief executive of Textron, as Burns’s successor.20

The Burns campaign for reappointment had ironic consequences for the Carter Presidency, though Carter himself seemed oblivious to them. The easy-money policy begun by the Fed in late 1976 and extended through 1977 laid the groundwork for the inflationary run-up that would engulf President Carter a year later. The double-digit price inflation that would ultimately help defeat Carter was widely attributed to inept management by G. William Miller. In hindsight, many officials at the Fed privately conceded that Arthur Burns himself deserved a larger share of the blame.

In 1978, as inflation escalated again, Paul Volcker brooded about the future of the American economy. He was now president of the New York Fed. A lecture he delivered at New York University was a gloomy meditation on what lay ahead. The future would not be like the past, he warned. Something was changing in the collective psychology that shaped everyone’s economic choices. After a long era of prosperity and confident risk taking, Americans were shaken—by inflation, by the oil-price shock, by the 1970s’ long, severe recession. A “long cycle” of caution and uncertainty was unfolding.

The evidence, Volcker explained,

seems to me pretty clear that there is some tendency toward swings in the tempo and mood of business activity over long periods of time—say periods of ten to twenty years. Those swings may be influenced by a variety of more or less objective events, such as changes in population, wars and their aftermath, waves of technological innovation and so on. But those swings also appear to be influenced by less tangible, even psychological, phenomena. . . .

A long period of prosperity breeds confidence and confidence breeds new standards of what is prudent and what is risky. For a while, the process is self-reinforcing, sustaining investment and risk taking. But it may also contain some of the seeds of its own demise: eventually natural limits to some of the trends supporting the advance are reached and the advance cannot be sustained so easily. We find ourselves with more houses and shopping centers and oil tankers and steel capacity than we can readily absorb. Financial positions are extended and the economy has become more vulnerable to adverse and unexpected developments. . . . The mood turns conservative and uncertain. . . .21

The Bible spoke of seven good years followed by seven lean years. A controversial Russian economist, Nikolai Kondratieff, had once theorized that capitalism underwent “long waves” of fifty years or so —an extended cycle of innovation and upward thrust, despite the occasional setback of minor recessions, followed by a long era of general collapse and decline. The long cycle of growth, he claimed, would eventually exhaust itself, and then capitalist enterprise required a consolidating period of depression and retrenchment before it could regain vigor and growth. Modern economists, including Volcker, did not embrace the idea of a “Kondratieff cycle,” but they did accept what students of business cycles, Arthur Burns among them, had identified as “long swings” of ten to twenty-five years when economic growth and capital formation reached a peak and then retreated to eras of slower expansion.

Volcker, in his careful manner, added a particular insight of his own: if a new “long cycle” was unfolding, its duration would be crucially influenced by what was inside people’s minds—the psychology of investors, consumers, businessmen, even government. They could resist the new reality and plunge on confidently with risk taking that would be disappointed. Or they could adjust to the inevitable and accept the more modest prospects that the new reality imposed.

Volcker’s rumination was, thus, a profoundly conservative statement. He rejected the euphoric optimism of the New Economics or even the belief that human actors could somehow alter the deeper tides of economic fortune. If people failed to honor natural limits, he warned, they were destined to suffer turmoil and crisis. Volcker was articulating, in a sophisticated manner, the classic perspective of the central banker—order and stability required a moderation of aspirations. The essence of his essay might have been written by Nicholas Biddle in 1830 in rebuttal to Andrew Jackson’s attacks on the “Monster Bank” or by Benjamin Strong in the 1920s to silence angry farmers.

“If it is true that the difficulties of the recent past can be traced in part to a kind of overconfidence generated by a long period of prosperity—and that is the burden of my lecture—then it can also be true that a more conservative and cautious approach can help lay the base for renewed and sustained growth of the economy,” Volcker said.

The dour admonitions were the philosophical key to Paul Volcker’s mind, the framework that would guide his own performance as Federal Reserve chairman. Volcker would position himself in confrontation with this intangible core of mood and feelings. His goal, as he saw it, was to persuade the economic players, including financial markets and political leaders, to change their minds about the future, to rein in their expectations and accept less. The balmy, confident days were over. The new era of caution was for real. The “long cycle” of retreat and disappointment and failure would continue, Paul Volcker figured, until everyone got the message.





PART THREE

THE LIQUIDATION





