11 A CAR WITH TWO DRIVERS


On the unseasonably warm morning of January 20, 1981, the broad avenues of Washington were wreathed in Inaugural bunting. The city’s marble monuments glistened in the winter light, and galleries of expectant citizens lined the streets, waiting for a glimpse of the new leader. Marching bands, horses, military units paraded by, from the Capitol to the White House, and Washington became randomly alive with spontaneous tableaus—democratic vistas formed by the swirl of patriotic colors and exuberant crowds and imposing edifices of government.

The presidential ceremony was always a ritual of renewal for the nation, refreshing the faith in popular sovereignty, but this year’s Inauguration generated a special excitement. That very morning, the American diplomats held hostage in Iran for more than a year were finally freed to come home. The news ended a humiliating ordeal for the nation and added a cleansing spirit to the celebration. Even jaded lobbyists and bureaucrats in Washington, permanent operatives in the permanent government, sensed that this new President would be different. Ronald Reagan, taking his oath of office on the west front of the Capitol, called it a “new beginning.”

These United States [the new President declared] are confronted with an economic affliction of great proportions. We suffer from the longest and one of the worst sustained inflations in our national history. ... It threatens to shatter the lives of millions of our citizens. Idle industries

have cast workers into unemployment, human misery and personal indignity. Those who do work are denied a fair return for their labor by a tax system which penalizes successful achievement and keeps us from maintaining full productivity.

The economic disorder that had helped to elect Ronald Reagan reached a new pitch just as he was taking office. Price inflation remained in double digits. Interest rates, driven by inflation and the Federal Reserve’s stringent money policy, were again at unprecedented levels. The prime rate for bank loans, after falling so sharply in mid-1980, had climbed back to an even higher peak—above 21 percent. The national economy was recovering from 1980’s brief contraction, but uncertainly. Housing and autos were still depressed; the unemployment rate was 7.4 percent.

“In this present crisis,” the new President asserted, “government is not the solution to our problem; government is the problem.”

This conservative theme had been Ronald Reagan’s battle standard for twenty years as he rose in national politics, but it had special force now that he had attained the ultimate office of government. The man beside him on the Inaugural platform, Jimmy Carter, had blamed inflation on the excesses of popular appetites, the citizens themselves. Carter had admonished Americans to temper their own desires for material goods. He had promised government action to halt the inflationary binge. And the government had so far failed.

Now, with Ronald Reagan, the logic of guilt was reversed. The public was absolved and the government itself was blamed. It was Washington, not the people, that had ruined the American economy, Reagan assured his audience. Instead of scolding private citizens, the new President celebrated their enterprise and applauded their ambitions for personal gain. Instead of dour sermons on spiritual malaise, Ronald Reagan offered sunny optimism.

His indictment of the government started with the complaint that burdensome federal taxes on workers and business had stifled their initiative and depressed the engine of capitalism. Furthermore, the government had failed to balance its own accounts, spending more each year than it collected in revenues. “For decades,” the new President complained, “we have piled deficit upon deficit, mortgaging our future and our children’s future for the temporary convenience of the present. . . . You and I, as individuals, can, by borrowing, live beyond our means, but for only a limited period of time. Why, then, should we think that collectively, as a nation, we’re not bound by the same limitation?”

Reagan promised to deliver a new program for economic recovery



that would overcome the “negative economic forces” and reverse the damage caused by his predecessors. “It is time,” he vowed, “to reawaken this industrial giant, to get government back within its means and to lighten our punitive tax burden.”

Four weeks after his Inaugural, the President announced the details of his plan. To increase incentives for wage earners and business enterprises, Reagan asked Congress to approve a three-year reduction in individual income-tax rates, totaling 30 percent. To foster business expansion, he proposed additional tax relief for corporations as well as relief from federal regulations. The formulation known as “supply-side economics” was actually an updated version of the tax philosophy first articulated in the 1920s by Andrew Mellon, Treasury Secretary for Reagan’s boyhood hero, Calvin Coolidge. The intent was to scale back the progressive income tax; the assumption was that, once in private hands, the money would flow into capital investments, building up the supply side of the economy—new factories and technologies, a larger base of productive capacity. All together, however, Reagan’s tax cuts would reduce the federal government’s revenue by a total of $540 billion over five years, raising a specter that would have alarmed the conservative orthodoxy of Andrew Mellon and Calvin Coolidge—huge federal deficits, in peacetime and under a Republican President.

To avoid that outcome, President Reagan promised simultaneously to shrink the federal government and drastically reduce its spending. Initially, his economic recovery plan outlined budget cuts totaling $41 billion, an unprecedented cutback for a single year, with more huge reductions promised in subsequent years. Big government would get smaller; private enterprise, as well as individuals, would keep more of its own money to spend and invest as it wished.

Reagan promised that, given several years of cumulative budget cuts and revived economic prosperity, his blueprint would produce a balanced federal budget by 1984. The claim seemed dubious on its face since, by the President’s own accounting, the federal deficits would actually grow substantially larger in the immediate future, if his program was enacted. The Reagan agenda also included a massive increase for defense—hundreds of billions in new spending that would largely offset the savings he envisioned from budget cuts for domestic programs. Meanwhile, his proposed tax reductions would lose, on average, $100 billion a year in government revenue. Taken together, Reagan’s proposals appeared to produce the opposite of what he promised—much larger federal deficits. As financial markets had learned painfully over the previous fifteen years, huge federal deficits were usually the predicate for continuing price inflation.

But Ronald Reagan was as dedicated to restoring “sound money” as he was hostile to centralized government. Modern inflation, in fact, was an important particular in his indictment against Washington. Though it was not generally known, Reagan was the first modern President who could fairly be labeled a monetarist. He was a disciple of Milton Friedman’s, the monetarist economist whose scathing critique of the Federal Reserve had persuaded so many others. For years, Reagan complained, reckless liberal politicians had pushed the Federal Reserve into pumping up the money supply to provide short-term economic stimulus at the expense of long-term price stability. In order to break the raging price inflation, the President explained, money must be disciplined at its source—the central bank—and Reagan fully endorsed the Federal Reserve’s commitment, already under way, to gradually slow down the growth of the money supply. What Paul Volcker had begun in October 1979 Ronald Reagan wanted too— confronting inflation by reducing money growth.

“Now, we fully recognize the independence of the Federal Reserve System,” Reagan said, “and will do nothing to interfere with or undermine that independence. We will consult regularly with the Federal Reserve Board on all aspects of our economic program and will vigorously pursue budget policies that’ll make their job easier in reducing monetary growth.” The outcome, Reagan predicted, would be lower inflation, lower interest rates and restored vigor for financial markets and the productive economy.

The more Ronald Reagan talked about his “economic recovery program,” the more confident he sounded. “This plan will get our economy moving again,” he declared, “create productivity growth, and thus create the jobs that our people must have.”

Two weeks after the plan was announced, Reagan thought he saw his own optimism spreading throughout the land. “There is a kind of glow out there among the people,” the President told Walter Cronkite in a television interview, “and a confidence that things are going to be all right, where, a short time ago, polls were revealing that the people didn’t think things were going to get better.”

The explanation, Reagan thought, was that his economic program gave people a new sense of certainty about the future. “Our program gives a stability down the road ahead,” the President explained. “A person can say, T know what’s going to happen for the next few years.

. . . Someone can say, T have confidence to do this, because I have been told and I know what’s going to happen. . . .’”*

The chairman of the Federal Reserve Board did not, of course, deliver an independent State of the Union address of his own, but he did make public speeches, from time to time, and his estimate of the future sounded very different from the new President’s. During the fall campaign, when the Fed was pushing up interest rates and Jimmy Carter was attacking it, Volcker had kept a low profile. Starting in November, immediately after Reagan’s landslide victory, the Federal Reserve chairman began a series of brooding public lectures, speeches that sounded dark and skeptical compared with the President-elect’s engaging optimism. Ronald Reagan spoke confidently of restored vigor and prosperity for the American economy. Paul Volcker talked about pain.

“Let us not be beguiled into thinking there are quick and painless solutions,” Volcker told a banquet audience in New York City.

“There is no way we can avoid a clash between monetary restraint . . . and the growth of economic activity,” he warned a university gathering in Milwaukee.

“If monetary policy is going to do it alone,” Volcker asked gloomily, “how long is it going to take and what are the unnecessary costs going to be in financial market pressure and lost output, in unemployment and deferred growth? I think there is a lot of evidence that it could be considerable. . . .”2

Volcker’s ominous remarks—veiled warnings he repeated for several months following Ronald Reagan’s election—were ignored by the news media, newspapers and television. The Washington press, like the rest of the capital, was caught up in the excitement and euphoria surrounding the new President and his bold plans for conservative reform.

The news media rarely paid much attention to what was said by Federal Reserve governors. The Fed was a central political institution of the American system, capable of altering the lives and fortunes of private citizens more directly and forcefully than most other components of government, yet the press covered it sparingly and deferentially, as though the Fed’s decisions were of interest only to economists and Wall Street technicians. Most stories about monetary policy ran on the financial pages and were written in the jargon familiar to financial specialists but impenetrable for average readers. Above all, the press treated the central bank as a benevolent nonpolitical institution, somehow divorced from the normal combat among interest groups in Washington and utterly uninterested in the politics of winners and losers. If one judged the central bank solely on the basis of its uncritical press coverage, the Federal Reserve appeared to be the only agency of government that never made mistakes. Reporters and editors, who considered themselves such skeptical observers of government, submitted unblushingly to self-censorship in this realm.

They too deferred to the cultural taboo that surrounded the creation of money.

The central bank, in most seasons, encouraged the press to keep a respectful distance. In addition to the Fed’s secrecy, Volcker and the other governors spoke in the dry and cautious language of economists, technical talk that was not very quotable. Their pronouncements were usually hedged with dangling qualifiers and framed in bland euphemisms that required expert translation to be understood. Volcker, for instance, would never use the word “recession” to describe what he expected for the American economy. Fed governors, instead, spoke of the “pain” and “significant problems” that they foresaw, the “sacrifice” and “substantial adjustments” that would be required—vague code words that did not lend themselves to shocking headlines.3

Yet, given his cautious nature, Paul Volcker was being remarkably forthright now. He was describing the “clash” he saw coming, as the Fed pursued its goal of restraining the economy while the new President promised the opposite. Notwithstanding the optimistic forecasts emanating from the Reagan Administration, breaking inflation would not be a painless process. “The likelihood of a squeeze is apparent,” Volcker warned.

No one was listening. It was as if Volcker were trying to remind everyone what the Fed was in the process of doing—“leaning hard” on the money supply and on the struggling economy, forcing interest rates to extraordinary levels. If Volcker’s intention was to counter the euphoric promises being made for the new Reagan program, to provoke second thoughts about massive tax reductions, he failed. All eyes were on the Chief Executive. The second-most-powerful officer of government, the independent chairman of the Federal Reserve, was ignored.

The basic arithmetic that Volcker spelled out for his audiences described the collision he foresaw—and suggested the likelihood of another recession. The Federal Reserve, by limiting the growth of money, was ultimately determining the size of the nominal Gross National Product for the nation—the sum of all U.S. economic output as measured in dollars. The Fed could control the growth of nominal GNP. What the Fed could not control, at least in the short term, was how much of the nominal GNP would simply reflect price inflation, more dollars paid for the same old goods, and how much of it would represent real growth in the economy’s output. Real growth, of course, was what counted—the real value of expanded production after discounting the dollar inflation—the familiar measure reported each quarter in the newspapers.

The distinction between nominal GNP and real GNP was more visible in microcosm: an auto factory that turned out a thousand cars one year and sold them for $5 million might produce the same number of cars the next year but sell them for $6 million. The company’s real output increased by zero, contributing nothing to growth in real GNP, but its dollar volume grew by 20 percent, which would be reflected in nominal GNP. By selling its cars at higher prices, the company did not necessarily come out ahead, of course, because its own costs were rising too—the price of labor, the price of raw materials. The same distinction between real value and dollar volume, repeated millions of times throughout all the economic sectors, determined the sums known as real GNP and nominal GNP for the nation.

For the Federal Reserve, the squeeze was obvious: as it applied its restraint on the money supply, the central bank in essence set an upper limit on how much growth would be possible for the nominal GNP. If so, something had to give—either the price inflation or the real output. But which one? Volcker and other governors patiently explained the arithmetic to various audiences: inflation was now running at 10 or 11 percent. A healthy economy would add another 3 to 5 percent on top of that in real growth—requiring a total of 13 to 15 percent in nominal GNP. But the Federal Open Market Committee was setting a much lower goal for 1981—targets that would hold nominal GNP between 9 and 12 percent. The “squeeze” was the gap in those numbers.

“That discrepancy,” Volcker said, “. . . is suggestive of the problem.” If inflation continued in double digits and the Federal Reserve kept its word on limiting nominal GNP, there was no room left for real growth. In fact, real growth would probably be negative—a fancy way of saying that the economy would actually be shrinking. America would soon be back in recession.

But what if inflation abated instead? Fed officials could not prove this wouldn’t happen, but experience taught that it would be the real economy that declined first, not escalating prices. Theoretically, if every economic player, from labor unions demanding higher wages to corporate planners setting prices on products, were to decide abruptly and unanimously that inflation was over, that they no longer needed to seek additional wage and price increases to protect themselves, then inflation could indeed abate suddenly. Inflation would miraculously melt away and the economy could flourish, regardless of the Fed’s restraint.

Unfortunately, as Volcker explained, it had never worked that way in the past. Human nature argued against it. Even if people wanted to forgo another round of price or wage increases, they could not easily do so. Prices were embedded in contracts—labor wage contracts, loan agreements, marketing and investment plans. When a farmer borrowed for the spring planting, he counted on getting a certain price for his crops in the fall. So did his banker. Labor unions, corporations, even individual families entered transactions following similar assumptions.

Furthermore, after years of enduring inflation, Americans were deeply cynical about the government’s frequent promises to end it. “Skeptical Americans,” Volcker noted, “are all too likely to claim Missouri residence: they will want to be shown.” If so, skeptical businesses would continue to demand higher prices and employees would expect higher wages and the dollar chase would continue. If the Fed held tight, as promised, the economy would have to slow down first. Price inflation would subside later.

The Federal Reserve chairman was more circumspect in describing his other anxiety: while the Federal Reserve was confronting inflation with tight money and high interest rates, the Reagan government was embarking in the opposite direction. The President’s across-the-board tax reductions would be stimulating the economy, while Volcker was trying to restrain it. And the prospect of much larger federal deficits might encourage the expectations of more inflation, just as the Fed was trying to persuade financial markets of the opposite. To use the Presidents’ metaphor, Ronald Reagan wanted to “reawaken the industrial giant” while Paul Volcker wanted to sedate it.

“Before I join the ‘taxpayers’ revolt,’ in the name of anti-inflationary policy,” the Fed chairman said, “I must emphasize the necessary corollary. We cannot proceed without concern about the size of the deficit. Prudent tax reduction, in the end, depends on expenditure restraint.”

Sophisticated listeners appreciated that the Federal Reserve chairman was implicitly arguing against the new President’s economic agenda. If fiscal policy was stimulative, that meant monetary policy alone would carry the burden of enforcing restraint and must overcompensate to get results. Volcker’s dissent sounded like a lament: “I sincerely question whether monetary policy by itself can or should be asked to carry the entire load.”

The potential mismatch of government policies—the President and Congress determined to accelerate economic growth, while the central bank simultaneously tried to brake it—could produce its own damage to the economy, Volcker warned. 1

that a realistic, tolerable, believable course if other instruments of policy and opinion are running counter to our purposes? Will the sustainability of the policy be credible if the costs in growth and employment seem excessive? And the costs fall unfairly on the industries and elements of the population most dependent on credit?

The chairman’s troubled questions were the core issues that confronted Ronald Reagan’s economic agenda in 1981. The President wanted to encourage economic growth with tax cuts, but the President also wanted the Federal Reserve simultaneously to restrain the economy with tight money and high interest rates. In plain language, did it make sense for the federal government to attempt both things at once? If the President pushed one way, would the Federal Reserve feel compelled to pull even harder in the opposite direction?

The consequences, as Volcker elliptically suggested, would be even higher interest rates, more severe “pain” and “sacrifice” than would otherwise be necessary. The millions of Americans who depend on borrowing would suffer additional distress—consumers, farmers, home builders, auto dealers, businesses of every type—without ever understanding its source. People and institutions that lend money would naturally be the beneficiaries.

The chairman’s questions did not excite a great debate. The President and Congress and the Federal Reserve were not obligated to confront the disparity in their economic policies. Given the independent status accorded to the central bank, there was no forum anywhere in the government, no existing mechanism, that compelled the executive branch and the Federal Reserve to sit down and formally reconcile their differences. The Federal Reserve’s regulation of the money supply and the President’s control over spending and taxation were both powerful levers for manipulating the private economy, yet they could theoretically push in opposite and uncoordinated directions —regardless of the unintended side effects for private citizens.

Volcker’s questions, therefore, could be easily evaded by the community of Washington decision makers. And evasion was the essence of what occurred in the fateful political battles of 1981. Congress, responding to the President’s confident optimism, declined to choose between the contradictory impulses of stimulus and restraint. It accepted both. The decisions would become a kind of threshold for the decade of the eighties that, once crossed, would create utterly unprecedented conditions for the American economy—a bewildering new order for how rewards and penalties were to be allocated among private citizens.

After the Inauguration, Paul Volcker muted his message. As Ronald Reagan campaigned brilliantly for his economic program, building toward dramatic victories in Congress, the Fed chairman’s public expressions of dissent became even more discreet. He eventually dropped the stark warnings about an impending “clash” and also the broad hints of likely recession. The political momentum in Washington was clearly running in favor of the President. The train was rolling down the tracks and Paul Volcker was not about to stand in its way.

The chairman of the Federal Reserve, powerful as he was, lacked the political standing to challenge a popular new Chief Executive in frontal debate. To do so, Volcker would have had to put his own institution’s independence at risk, inviting retaliation from the ascendant Republicans. The Fed chairman already felt politically exposed because of the stringent money policy and high interest rates he was imposing on the American economy. Instead, Volcker’s gloomy predictions, his arguments against the Reagan tax cuts, were confined to confidential conversations with senators and congressmen. His timely warnings remained virtually unknown to the general public.4

For Bruno Pasquinelli, the political changes in Washington offered no comfort. His construction company in Homewood, Illinois, was already in recession. For twenty-five years, Pasquinelli Construction had built modestly priced homes, under $50,000, as many as six hundred a year. Since 1979, when the Federal Reserve started to escalate the price of money, his net worth had shrunk by 70 percent. “Those interest rates have killed me and my business,” he said, “killed the small home buyer.

“I am tremendously frightened,” Pasquinelli said. “I don’t sleep at night anymore. I owe money. I don’t have government guarantees. I don’t have a pension fund. I put my pension fund up as a guarantee for notes. I don’t have anything. When I come to negotiate with a banker, I don’t negotiate. It is a card game, but I don’t have any cards.”

In Atlanta, Georgia, David Chatham was preparing to lay off one-fifth of the regular employees at his home-building company. In 1979, he had sold seventy-nine new homes. This year, 1981, he would sell only fifty-four and it would take three times longer to find buyers, which meant the builder had to extend his own borrowing. “We came to the conclusion,” Chatham said, “that our company has become a nonprofit organization.”

William Cahill, a real-estate broker in suburban Chicago, saw his sales dwindle by two-thirds. In 1979, his firm handled 640 homes. Within the next years, it was down to 214 sales. “We are in the worst times we have ever been in,” Cahill said. “We have had recessions, slowdowns, other things before, but never as bad as this.”

When the housing industry collapsed, so did its suppliers. In Aberdeen, Washington, Lucille Sajec was laid off by the plywood mill where she worked. The mill’s crew shrank from 220 workers to 85. “Now all we are doing is stockpiling plywood,” she said, “because we can’t sell the plywood.”

Mrs. Sajec worried about the future. “In this mill,” she said, “there is a high rate of divorce. There is people losing their homes. It just has gotten to a point where it is not even funny anymore.”

Housing, automobiles and other interest-sensitive sectors—where both the buyer and the seller rely heavily on borrowed money—never really recovered from the roller-coaster recession of the previous year. Early in 1980, the combination of high interest rates and credit controls had forced the economy into a sharp but brief contraction. When the Federal Reserve eased money rapidly in the spring, however, interest rates fell dramatically—from a high near 20 percent to below 9 percent—and the economy turned around abruptly. By fall, however, the Fed was progressively tightening again and driving interest rates to a new peak. The Federal Funds rate rose past 12 percent in October and by January it crested at 20 percent. In the first quarter of 1981, the nation’s real GNP was still expanding, in the aggregate, but housing and the auto industry remained depressed.

The practical impact of the Fed’s initiative was to jack up the price of homes, nationwide, driving millions of potential buyers out of the housing market. Herman J. Smith, a Fort Worth, Texas, builder who was president of the National Association of Home Builders, calculated the arithmetic for typical home buyers. A $60,000 home, purchased with a mortgage interest rate of 9 percent, would commit the family to a monthly payment of $483. When the mortgage rate went to 15 percent, the monthly payment rose to $758—an effective price increase of nearly 60 percent. At the level of 15 percent mortgages, Smith complained, about 90 percent of American families could no longer afford a $60,000 home. Yet, in the opening months of 1981, mortgage rates rose above 17 percent.

Bruno Pasquinelli, like thousands of other businessmen in distress, appealed to his congressman. “Hell, we are talking about the Fed, Volcker, all these guys,” Pasquinelli told members of Congress at a House hearing. “You are the lawmakers. Change the law. What makes the Federal Reserve System sacrosanct? Why is Congress not represented on the Federal Reserve Board? You are the people. I put you there. I vote for you. Why aren’t we represented there?”5

Every Thursday morning, the Federal Reserve chairman had breakfast with the Secretary of the Treasury and aides. Every Wednesday, officials from Treasury and the White House lunched at the Fed with governors and senior staff members. Every other week, the President’s Council of Economic Advisers sponsored a similar luncheon at the White House.

Paul Craig Roberts, Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for Economic Policy in the Administration, said:

Anybody on the outside with a conspiratorial frame of mind would think we were in there plotting interest rates for the country over lunch. That’s bullshit. If you brought up interest rates, the Fed people let you know that you were an impolite boor even to ask. They think that’s their job, not yours, and they won’t talk about it with you. Why not be a polite guest and talk about pleasant things like baseball or basketball?6

William Niskanen, a business economist whom President Reagan appointed to the Council of Economic Advisers, felt the same frustration. “It’s very difficult,” Niskanen said, “to get the Fed to talk about monetary policy. We talked about wine, which is Henry Wallich’s specialty. We talked about baseball, about vacations. They were more than willing to talk about what we were doing—but not about what they were doing.”7

Frederick Schultz, vice chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, was one of those who steered the conversations away from the substance of Fed policy.

When the Reagan Administration first came in [Schultz explained], they said we’d like to have better communications with the Fed, a way to talk regularly. But Paul said to me: “You’ve got to be very careful not to have a situation where they are making overt attempts to influence our policy.” They would try to argue with us about monetary policy and I would explain what we were doing—nothing more. I tried to stay away from a situation where they could think they were influencing our policy.

The Federal Reserve, in fact, did not tell the Reagan White House much about what it was doing. Sophisticated outsiders assumed that, despite its official independence, the central bank regularly coordinated with the executive branch in a private manner, seeking informal approval for its decisions. This assumption was particularly important to those political scientists who defended the Fed’s odd position in democratic government. Despite appearances, they argued, the Federal Reserve was discreetly responsive to elected government, through unseen channels of private collaboration.

But the unseen consultation did not seem to exist, at least not during the Reagan Administration, despite all the private lunches and breakfasts. The strongest proof of this, ironically, was contained in dozens of confidential memoranda on the Fed written by Reagan’s economic advisers. Since these memos were intended solely for the private reading of the President and his staff, there was no reason to omit sensitive information. Yet none of the confidential memos contained even a hint of inside knowledge of the Fed’s decisions. The President’s policy makers were compelled to discuss the central bank’s actions and intentions in the same uncertain tone used by Wall Street’s Fed watchers—offering expert hunches, but no sure knowledge of what was happening.

The Reagan Administration and the Federal Reserve were, ostensibly, in agreement on the correct course for money-supply regulation. In their private relations, however, the two centers of governing power were mutually suspicious, even contemptuous of each other. Volcker’s wariness was well founded—key positions in this new Administration were filled with some of the Fed’s most zealous critics.

Beryl Sprinkel, a Chicago banker and monetarist economist, was appointed to Volcker’s old job at Treasury, Under Secretary for Monetary Affairs, the official responsible for liaison with the central bank. For years, Sprinkel had been a leading voice on the Shadow Open Market Committee, the private group of banking and academic economists who regularly assaulted Volcker and his predecessors with such harsh critiques. Jerry Jordan, an economics professor named to the Council of Economic Advisers, was also an alumnus of the monetarists’ shadow committee.

The disciples of Milton Friedman, like the master himself, regarded stable money as the core issue of government management, and they were inclined to dismiss competing factors as relatively inconsequential, even deficit spending by the federal government. For a sound economy, what mattered was money, the monetarists insisted, a focus that seemed narrow and obsessive to other economists who did not share the faith. Sprinkel himself once used a metaphor to describe money that evoked the same psychological overtones that Sigmund Freud had identified in dreams and infantile transference—money was food. “Stuffing a kid with too much food doesn’t make him grow faster; it makes him sick,” Sprinkel explained to a congressional committee. “Similarly, injecting a lot of money into an economy does not make it grow faster; it just makes it sick.”8

While Beryl Sprinkel endorsed the Fed’s commitment to steady reduction in money growth, he doubted the central bank’s sincerity. “I’ve heard those beautiful words before,” he said. “Excessive and erratic growth of money has plagued the economy for more than fifteen years.” Jerry Jordan of the CEA likewise disparaged the central bank’s capabilities. “The Federal Reserve Board’s reputation as an effective inflation-fighting institution has been so severely damaged by events of the past decade,” Jordan said, “that I doubt that their views on the economy and the appropriate policies for the circumstances carry much weight with the public.”

Others in the Reagan White House, who were not monetarists themselves, shared the skepticism. Murray Weidenbaum, the new chairman of the CEA, complained about the Fed’s “stop and go” monetary policy. David Stockman, the new budget director, warned in a memorandum to the President that if the Fed accommodated the rising prices in 1981, “the already tattered credibility of the post-October 1979 Volcker monetary policy will be destroyed. . . . The markets have now almost completely lost confidence in Volcker and the new monetary policy.”9

The Reagan team had ample grounds for skepticism—the roller coaster of 1980. As outsiders, these economists had watched the gyrating money supply and interest rates through 1980 and concluded, variously, that Volcker’s management was either politically motivated or incompetent. In 1979, Paul Volcker had promised a monetarist approach, rigorously controlling the money supply to provide modest, stable growth. The money numbers had caromed up and down wildly ever since. Given that shaky performance and the Fed’s long-standing hostility to monetarism, the Reagan monetarists doubted the sincerity of Volcker’s conversion to their faith.

Not very subtly, in public and private forums, the President’s advisers put the Fed on notice: they would be watching closely to make sure that the Federal Reserve kept its word. If the central bank really did slow down the rate of money expansion, the Reagan Administration would lend its full support. But if the money numbers continued their abrupt surges and declines, the executive branch would not hesitate to criticize.

“The Federal Reserve has said consistently over the past ten years that they have a policy of bringing money under control,” Sprinkel observed in an internal memorandum for the Cabinet Council on Economic Affairs. “The fact is that they have failed to match action with intent.”10

At first, Sprinkel proposed a weekly consultation between the Fed chairman and himself, but Volcker refused. “Volcker said he doesn’t report to the Under Secretary—he held that job once himself,” Paul Craig Roberts related. “So Sprinkel set up the regular Treasury breakfasts including all the heavyweight players from the Administration. It was more difficult for Volcker because he didn’t have his senior staff there to change the subject. But Volcker has a way of talking for an hour and not telling you much.”

Sprinkel kept delivering the message any way he could, usually by urging his boss, Secretary of the Treasury Donald Regan, to demand better performance from Volcker. In public, the Reagan Administration espoused a gradual approach, steadily reducing money growth year by year. In the Administration’s private councils, however, Sprin-kel advocated a sterner policy—the faster the Fed tightened, the better.

The pattern of money growth which is implied by the gradual approach should be considered as a ceiling for the rate of monetary expansion [Sprinkel argued in his April 24 memorandum]. Any under-shooting of this long-term target path, such as in the first quarter of this year, should be accepted. No effort should be made to boost money growth in order to make up for such under-shooting and instead the target for the future rate of monetary expansion should be reduced accordingly.

Quite aside from his political triumph, Ronald Reagan’s ascension to the Presidency made possible a historic watershed—the rehabilitation of classical economic doctrines that had been out of fashion for fifty years. Reagan’s economic program restored to influence three strands of conservative thinking that were once the conventional wisdom of economics. All three had been discredited by the debacle of 1929 and eclipsed by the Keynesian doctrine that came to power with Roosevelt’s New Deal.

Monetarism was one of them, the classical theory of money reasserted and popularized by Milton Friedman. The Depression experience, including the failure of the Federal Reserve, had persuaded the mainstream that control of money was a “weak reed,” as Herbert Hoover had put it, for managing the economy. Friedman devoted his career to convincing the nation that this was wrong. Another strand was the “supply side” argument for shrinking the progressive income tax, an approach inherited directly from Andrew Mellon’s “trickle down” economics in the 1920s. In order to stimulate savings and investment, just as Mellon had argued, the supply-side tax relief would be provided disproportionately to upper-income families, since, the theory held, the wealthiest citizens would obviously be most able to devote their tax windfall to investment in new production. The third strand was the conservative orthodoxy that the Republican Party had preached stubbornly (and unsuccessfully) ever since the New Deal— deficit spending was ruinous in itself and the federal government must balance its budget.

Ronald Reagan comfortably embraced all three doctrines, and for twenty years his speeches had elaborated all three themes. He attacked the “printing press” money promoted by liberals, the burdens of the progressive income tax and the profligacy of deficit spending.

Like Reagan himself, the three schools of conservative thought were united by their aversion to big government, a generalized commitment to laissez-faire economics and “the magic of the marketplace,” as the President called it. They also shared an active contempt for the ideas of John Maynard Keynes and any who espoused them.11

Yet the three strands of conservatism contained theoretical conflicts and were potentially incompatible—particularly if all three were vigorously pursued at once. What divided them was the practical reality outlined in Paul Volcker’s cautionary speeches—a collision of purposes. How could the supply-side tax cuts pump up economic growth if the monetarists’ money policy was simultaneously retarding it? How could the Reagan program lead to a balanced budget if the tax cuts were at the same time increasing the deficits?

Reagan’s team of economic advisers was drawn from all three schools of conservative thinking, and despite their unity in public, they argued intensely among themselves over which priorities truly fulfilled the President’s mandate. In fact, the monetarists and supply siders did not agree at all on how to control inflation. The disciples of Friedman wanted stable regulation of the money aggregates; the supply-side camp thought the monetarist theory was inoperable (for approximately the same reasons that Fed officials disparaged monetarism). The supply siders argued that the only solution to inflation was a return to the gold standard. Yet Milton Friedman devoted a large portion of his monetary history to explaining why the gold standard was a failure.

The Administration’s internal disagreements were papered over in public, but, ironically, they were most visible to Paul Volcker and the other Fed officials. When they met periodically with the Reagan advisers, listening to the luncheon conversation, the Federal Reserve governors quickly grasped that these new policy makers from the White House and Treasury did not agree with one another on economic policy, much less with the Fed.

If you don’t think that wasn’t a zoo [exclaimed Fred Schultz, the Fed vice chairman]. Beryl was taking the monetarist line. Paul Craig Roberts was the Savonarola of supply-side economics. Larry Kudlow [assistant budget director for economic analysis] had the arrogance of youth. He and Stockman were bright young guys and they thought they were going to solve the problems of the world. Jerry Jordan was another monetarist. Every Administration comes in with a fairly strong ideological position and this one came in with more ideology than most.

The Reagan advisers agreed to resolve these fundamental contradictions by evading them. In constructing the President’s economic recovery program, they designed a forecast of how the economy would respond that defied historical experience—and ignored the “clash” of purposes cited by Paul Volcker. But it met everyone’s particular objective. “Our original forecast was not an exercise in economic analysis,” David Stockman conceded. “It was a statistical argument between the various doctrinal sects. The numbers became the medium by which those contradictory doctrines were harnessed together.” 12

The supply siders, in order to sell Congress on the tax cuts, insisted that the forecast show vigorous real growth. The monetarists demanded a year-by-year deceleration of the money supply. Meanwhile, the forecast must predict that inflation would subside and the federal budget would swing into balance. Both inside the White House and out, the blueprint became known as the “rosy scenario.” Those who questioned it, however, were dismissed as retrograde Keynesians who did not understand the new economic principles at work.

“The original forecast,” said William Niskanen of the CEA, “had inflation coming down without any real trade-off in growth. In other words, it was costless. I don’t know any economist who really believed it.”

“The problem was that the process was political,” said Paul Craig Roberts, who represented the supply siders in the argument. “We were trying to preserve the tax cuts. Marty Anderson [a White House policy adviser] would pop in and say, ‘Remember the President’s campaign promise to balance the budget.’ Murray Weidenbaum would argue about the core inflation rate. Stockman tried to resolve the argument by adjusting the numbers.”

As the congressional debate unfolded in the spring, budget experts around Washington zeroed in on the implausible claims made for the Administration’s fiscal policy—balanced budgets, despite massive tax cuts and increased defense spending—but few people recognized that the President’s blueprint for monetary policy was illogical on its face. That the economy could enjoy such expansive real growth while the money supply was simultaneously shrinking defied nature: people would have to start spending money faster and faster—circulating the available money supply at a higher and higher velocity. Even the monetarist architects did not defend this. In private, they conceded, the President’s monetary numbers made no sense.

The intellectual confusion and evasion within the Reagan Administration became a crucial fact that shaped the politics of the 1980s, for the ultimate effect, ironically, was to enhance the stature of Paul Volcker. In the community of Washington decision makers, ideas did matter and mattered especially if the advocate seemed coherent and self-confident. Volcker could play that role brilliantly. In contrast, it swiftly became clear to congressional insiders that the Reagan White House was in constant turmoil and flux—bickering with itself over its own economic policy. Volcker seemed to know what he was doing while his critics in the White House did not, and political deference naturally gravitated toward the strong-willed leader.

Subtly but surely, this undoubtedly strengthened Volcker’s hand throughout the Reagan years, particularly among members of Congress, and made it easier for the Federal Reserve chairman to dominate events. Even liberal Democrats, who might have been expected to challenge the Fed’s harsh strategy, were frightened by the chaos in the Reagan Administration and reassured by Volcker’s strong hand. Volcker himself may have been affected too. A friend and admirer explained: “Paul is at his best when he has an intelligent opponent who can challenge his thinking. When he doesn’t have intelligent opposition, that’s when Paul tends to make mistakes.”

The only rationale offered by the Reagan team as to how its contradictory policies were supposed to meld successfully was a wishful claim that people would change their economic behavior—once their confidence in government had been restored. This seemed an odd argument for conservatives to make, but it was advanced most enthusiastically in the early months of the Administration, particularly by Treasury Secretary Donald Regan, the former CEO at Merrill Lynch. Usually, the Treasury Secretary was drawn from Wall Street and served as the dour voice of caution in a President’s Cabinet. But Regan was from the ranks of Wall Street’s ebullient optimists—the stock-market traders—and he was as bullish as the President.

I believe the President’s program will begin to bear fruit even before it is enacted [Regan enthused in late March]. ... As people see the program unfold, as permanent changes in spending programs and tax rates move through Congress and are enacted into law ... we expect the public will respond. This will not be some sort of mystical response based on faith and psychology. The expectations we are referring to are the public’s logical computation of what they expect to happen in the future.13

“The whole thing is premised on faith,” as David Stockman explained it. Once financial markets are convinced the Reagan team is serious about its multiple goals—slower money growth, reduced spending, tax cuts and a balanced budget—investors will begin acting on their new expectations. “The inflation premium melts away like the morning mist,” Stockman predicted. “It could be cut in half in a very short period of time if the policy is credible. That sets off adjustments and changes in perception that cascade through the economy. You have a bull market in ’81, after April, of historic proportions.”14

The respectable name given to this reasoning was “rational expectations”—borrowed from a conservative economic theory which held that private economic players would always anticipate and adjust their actions to compensate for changes in government policy. Less grandly, it amounted to an existential wish: by changing people’s minds, Ronald Reagan would change their behavior.

At the Fed, the premise seemed so specious—utterly unrealistic— that it merely heightened suspicions that the Federal Reserve was being “set up” as the political scapegoat. The President was promising irreconcilable goals for the economy, and when these promises failed to materialize, the Fed would be blamed.

“One may wonder,” Henry Wallich dryly observed, “how an increase in this year’s deficit, accompanied by a promise to rescue it next year, would affect expectations.”15 If the past was any guide, the financial markets’ fears of continuing inflation would be aggravated, not alleviated, by the Reagan program, once the larger deficits became obvious. Instead of accepting lower interest returns, investors would demand even higher rates to protect their wealth against the future.

As an economic document, the Reagan plan seemed incoherent. The budget projections were dubious. The money-supply numbers simply didn’t add up. Yet, as a political document, it seemed brilliant. It promised relief from the anxieties of inflation, without the attendant costs of recession and unemployment. It asked Americans to enlist in a great struggle to restore the nation’s economic health, but instead of demanding sacrifice and self-denial as Jimmy Carter had, Ronald Reagan demanded only that citizens accept a reduction in their taxes.

For eight weeks, the Federal Reserve had eased off a bit, though it was still extraordinarily stringent. The Federal Funds rate, which the Fed had pushed to a historic peak of 20 percent in January 1981, was allowed to subside notch by notch. By the first week in March, it had fallen below 16 percent. Interest rates for other forms of short-term credit—corporate commercial paper, three-month Treasury bills, bank CDs—all followed the same trend line downward. Money was still very tight, but somewhat less so.

The bond market refused to go along. While the Fed was letting short-term rates subside, the interest rates on long-term investments were heading in the opposite direction—rising, instead of falling. From the second week of January to the end of March, while short rates fell, the average interest rate for corporate bonds rose from 13.65 to 14.25. U.S. Treasury long-term bonds went up 90 basis points in the same period. The upward creep of long-term rates might have seemed modest to outsiders, but it was the contrary direction that was disturbing. The bond market was contradicting the Federal Reserve —and President Reagan.

Usually, Wall Street’s financial markets spoke in a babble of contradictory opinions, but this was one of those instances where the message was clear. Investors in the bond market, in a manner of speaking, were casting their ballot—and it was a veto of the euphoric promises being made in Washington. Far from being reassured by the Reagan economic program, they were instead increasingly nervous about the future—demanding higher returns before they would put their money into long-term financial assets. Despite Ronald Reagan’s optimism and Donald Regan’s predictions, the bond market was betting there would be more inflation ahead, not less.

In case anyone in Washington missed the point, one of Wall Street’s leading gurus delivered the warning directly. “Rallies in the bond markets will be just interruptions in a bear market setting,” predicted Henry Kaufman, chief economist at Salomon Brothers, the investment-banking firm. Long-term interest rates, he said, would continue to rise—along a “rocket trajectory”—if the President’s expansionary tax cuts were enacted, accompanied by massive new spending for defense.

Among irreverent Wall Street traders, particularly from the stock market, Kaufman was known as “Dr. Doom,” because the dour economist was always issuing depressing predictions—higher interest rates, higher inflation and bearish financial markets. Most of the time, for the previous decade, his predictions had been right. “One of the problems of achieving credibility,” Kaufman warned Washington, “is that you just cannot promise to balance the budget three or four years from now.”16

Treasury Secretary Donald Regan, an old Wall Street hand himself, scoffed at the bond market’s pessimism. “Never look to a bond trader for economic advice,” Regan said.17

Federal Reserve officials were not so sanguine. Among all the various “crowds” that gathered as Wall Street’s financial markets, the bond market was considered the noblest “crowd” of all, sober and judicious compared with other markets. This was the place where judgments were made about the long-term future. Its function, aside from making money for traders and investors, was the core process of capitalism—capital formation, the flow of old wealth into the creation of new productive capacity.

And the Fed listened most attentively to the bondholders’ concerns. In daily operations, the Fed executed its policy moves in the money market, manipulating short-term interest rates by adding or withdrawing reserves from the banking system. But it was the bond market— whose long-term interest rates the Fed could not directly control— that mattered most to the success of monetary policy. When bond traders bid on investments of ten or twenty or even thirty years’ duration, whether it was government bonds to cover the federal debt or corporate bonds to raise capital for new factories, they were implicitly making a forecast on future inflation. Their inflation forecasts were an implicit judgment on how well the Federal Reserve was doing its job.

The bond market and the Fed were kindred spirits, both cautious and conservative, both wanting the same things—stable prices, sound money, order. Bondholders depended on the Federal Reserve to protect their wealth, because as inflation cheapened the value of the dollar, it directly eroded the value of their long-term financial assets. For the last decade, long-term inflation had devastated the market for corporate bonds.

But the bond market was also a critic, a skeptical audience that continuously assessed the Fed’s performance and regularly scolded errors or lapses. When governors from the central bank worried aloud about their “credibility,” they meant in particular: did the bond market really believe their promises to control inflation? When bond traders bid up interest rates, it meant that, all things considered, they did not trust the Federal Reserve to protect the future value of money. Volcker and the other governors worked continuously to persuade them and win their good opinion.

Bondholders, in particular, did not necessarily want the same thing everyone else in the country wanted from the economy, and they often seemed perversely narrow-minded in their reactions to events. Bonds rallied on bad news and sulked over good news. If the government announced a sharp decline in retail sales or manufacturing output, the price of bonds rose. If Washington reported a quarter of healthy growth for the Gross National Product, bond prices sagged. Bond investors were preoccupied with one question about the nation’s economic performance—not the actual results in production, income and jobs, but how everything would affect the future value of their dollars. An economy expanding robustly heightened their fears. A weak economy assured the bondholders that their money was safe.

The bondholders were one of the oldest, most influential interest groups in American politics, yet their presence had nearly vanished from political discourse. Financial wealth, like so many other aspects of American life, had become bureaucratized over the years; wealth was now held in large, impersonal institutions that diffused its visibility. In crude terms, nevertheless, the bondholders had not much changed since Andrew Jackson’s time—they were the wealthiest individuals and financial institutions that owned most of the capital invested in long-term debt paper, including the U.S. government’s.

Among individuals, for instance, the top 10 percent of American families owned 72 percent of corporate and federal bonds held by individuals plus 86 percent of state and local bonds. Among institutions, commercial banks owned about 20 percent of the outstanding Treasury debt (roughly the same share held directly by wealthy families) and another 10 percent was owned by insurance companies and other corporations. Private wealth was, of course, redundant—the same people likely to hold the bonds in their personal portfolios also owned, disproportionately, the stock of the corporations and banks that owned bonds. The wealth holders represented the conservative hand of the past, but capitalism had no future without their cooperation. Paul Volcker preferred to call them “the forces for stability.”18

The bondholders functioned like any other political interest group, even though they were not formally organized as such. They actively sought to influence the government policy that would benefit their interests—in particular, the money regulation by the Federal Reserve. They had many channels of influence, but the bond market was their principal voice—the lever by which they influenced public policy most directly.

What was good for this affluent minority of citizens, of course, might or might not be good for the rest of the country, and, very often, the bondholders sought the opposite of what the majority wanted. In the early spring of 1981, the nation at large would not likely have urged the Federal Reserve to raise the price of money still further, but that is what the anxieties of the bond market demanded. Like all special-interest groups, of course, bondholders saw their own self-interest as synonymous with the national interest.

Officials at the Federal Reserve listened closely. They monitored the daily prices and interest rates from the bond trading, but they also listened to the random chatter of market participants. When “Dr. Doom” said that inflation and interest rates would likely increase, when the market’s behavior seemed to agree, the message rippled immediately through the policy discussions at the marble temple on Constitution Avenue.

Indeed, Volcker and his colleagues were frustrated because the bond market seemed hypersensitive to the Fed’s slightest move. Since 1979, when Volcker had initiated his monetarist approach, the financial markets tracked even the slightest wiggle in M-l—the basic money aggregate that included checking deposits and currency in circulation. The long-term credit markets reacted anxiously to the new money-supply figures reported by the Fed each week, trying to read long-range portents from every minor fluctuation. Some days, bond prices and rates swung dramatically if M-l surged or fell modestly but contrary to the Fed watchers’ predictions.

As it happened, M-l started expanding rapidly in early April, after months of below-normal growth. New jitters were expressed daily by traders in the market. If M-l grew too fast, they reasoned, then the Fed would have to tighten soon and that would send interest rates higher—thus depreciating the value of the bonds already purchased at lower rates. The traders began bidding up rates in anticipation.

“People are very nervous about a money-supply explosion this month,” said a senior vice president at Drexel Burnham Lambert. “You’re going to have another false explosion in money growth, which will set off inflationary expectations beyond reality,” an economic consulting firm warned. The chief economist at Philadelphia’s Fidelity Bank complained that the M-l surge, if left unchecked, would “spew a considerable amount of destabilizing inflation into the economy.” A Citibank executive predicted: “I think we will have a blip upward in rates for a while. The Fed may have been surprised at the recent money-supply increases and the continued strength of the economy.”

The comments were implicitly a running critique of how the Fed was doing and what adjustments it ought to make in the weeks ahead to satisfy opinion in the bond market. Volcker and other Fed officials constantly pleaded with the market specialists to be more patient— not to jump to extreme conclusions based on one or two weeks’ changes in the money supply. But, in a sense, the Fed had created the problem for itself: the central bank had promised Wall Street that its money policy would faithfully adhere to the M-l trend line and give only secondary attention to everything else. So the markets concentrated on M-l as the leading signal of the Fed’s actions. Whether their interpretations were right or not (and they were frequently wrong) hardly mattered. The bond market reacted nervously to M-l and the Federal Reserve reacted nervously to the bond market.

For curious outsiders, the most convenient window on this circular chatter was the daily “Credit Markets” column in The Wall Street Journal. It tracked the trading in the bond markets and, with scrupulous neutrality, provided a daily sampler of opinions from traders and bank economists. Most of the time, they were predicting short-range changes in prices and interest rates important only to the traders and investors themselves. On most days, the experts were issuing utterly contradictory opinions. But their forecasts always focused on the largest variable in their world—what they thought the Fed was going to do in the coming weeks or months.

Most citizens would find the information useless, if they were able to comprehend it at all. But Fed economists earnestly followed the running commentaries, like performers reading their reviews, and occasionally governors contributed comments of their own. The dialogue held enormous political consequences for the entire country, yet it resembled a closed loop: financial experts in Wall Street communicating with the government’s financial experts in Washington in a language that few other citizens could penetrate.

“Just as the financial press watches the Fed, the Fed watches the financial press, much more than people imagine,” a Federal Reserve Board research economist explained. “A lot of our analysis of markets actually comes from the press.”

While the financial press was highly specialized and inaccessible to most citizens, it represented one of the last surviving forums for public debate on the money question. The dialogue of opinion was quite exclusive, however, restricted to those who shared the same assumptions as the bondholders. Stability and order and “hard money,” they agreed, ought always to be the Federal Reserve’s first priority—to be served ahead of economic growth or full employment or rising wage income. In that regard, the wealth holders had become disenchanted with their protector. After fifteen years of continuing inflation, the chatter of the bond market was laced with a permanent tone of suspicion and resentment toward the Federal Reserve.

Now the Federal Reserve was attempting to make amends. The country was exhausted by the anxieties of inflation and ready to tolerate drastic action to stop it. The new political climate, enhanced by the election of a conservative Republican, allowed the Fed to do what in other times it might not have dared. It could serve the interests of the bondholders and the much larger group of citizens who held more modest portions of financial wealth but nonetheless felt the same sense of loss, the 45 percent of American families whose savings made them net creditors. The Fed would push the price of money high enough to break inflation and restore a stable dollar—and, perhaps, win eventual applause from the general public too.

At the beginning of April, the Fed discreetly yielded to the judgments from the bond market. Long-term rates were rising, contrary to the direction of the short-term rates influenced by the Federal Reserve. Though the real economy was weakening, the Fed changed directions itself. The Federal Funds rate, instead of declining further, was allowed to inch back upward again. The Fed had been unable to lead the market and so now it would follow the market.

As April unfolded, the bond market experienced a traumatic seizure that resembled an anxiety attack. President Reagan’s legislative program began its advance through Congress, gathering enthusiasm and preliminary victories, and long-term investors reacted with a panicky feeling. To compound their fears, the money supply was growing rapidly again. Either the Fed was losing control, as it had in 1980, or the Fed would soon have to tromp down even harder on money growth, driving rates higher. Either way, taken together, events in Washington shook up the bond market. “Prices tumbled,” as the financial news put it. Day after day, bond prices fell sharply, and their interest rates climbed correspondingly, even faster than their ascent during previous weeks. The average market rate on high-quality corporate bonds jumped 100 basis points over a month’s time, and so did the rates on long-term government bonds.

For many in the bond market, the jitters turned into debacle. Michigan Bell Telephone, with a triple-A credit rating, offered a new bond issue at a record interest rate of 15.9 percent, and yet brokers still had a hard time moving it. Alabama Power offered bonds at 17.5 percent. The U.S. Treasury marketed $4.3 billion in new two-year notes and received only $5 billion in bids, about half the normal response. The State of California failed to get any acceptable bids on a proposed $150 million bond issue.

“Apprehension is the only word you can use to describe this market,” a senior economist at San Francisco’s Crocker National Bank said. “Nobody wants to buy bonds yet,” said a vice president at Pittsburgh’s Mellon Bank. “There is a buyers’ strike because investors don’t like the outlook for inflation.”

“There’s a lot of blood around, a lot of losses,” said a government securities trader on Wall Street. An executive at First Boston added: “There are two emotions that move markets—fear and greed. Well, fear has become the dominant emotion.”19

Amid the turmoil, Federal Reserve Board members heard directly from one of the most important investors in the bond market—the commercial banks. The asset portfolios of America’s banks included more than $115 billion in government bonds, and when bond prices collapsed, bank assets shrank in value accordingly. The bankers’ Federal Advisory Council met privately with the Federal Reserve governors on April 30 and scolded the Fed for contributing to the disorders.

“The failure of long-term rates to decline, even when short-term rates were falling, is indicative of deeply entrenched inflationary expectations,” the bankers warned. “Apparently, the financial markets remain skeptical that the monetary authorities [the Federal Reserve] can or will maintain a steady but restrained growth of the money supply.”

The banker-advisers repeated an admonition they had delivered many times before: “The board must avoid a repetition of 1980 when explosive growth of the money supply occurred ... To allow such an occurrence again would greatly hinder the badly needed restoration of the financial markets’ confidence that a proper monetary policy will be carried out.”

A few months previously, the advisory council had speculated on the potential for what Wall Street called a “double-dip recession”— another contraction in 1981 right after the brief one of 1980. At their April meeting, however, the bankers revised their outlook. The economy, they estimated, is “likely to weaken but unlikely to fall into a full-blown recession.”

The Fed was under fire on many fronts. Its most important constituency, the commercial bankers, was upset with its performance. The bond market was panicky. On Capitol Hill, Democrats were attacking the Fed for high interest rates while the Republican advocates of supply-side tax reduction blamed the Fed for the roiled financial markets. “One has to question,” said Representative Jack Kemp, “whether or not they know what they’re doing.”20

At the White House, privately at least, the President’s economic advisers conceded that Wall Street was not buying their “rosy scenario.” Treasury Under Secretary Beryl Sprinkel acknowledged, in a briefing for the Cabinet Council on Economic Affairs, that the bond-market disruptions reflected doubts about President Reagan’s program. The rising long-term rates, Sprinkel reported, “indicate significant skepticism about the likelihood of the budgetary, tax and monetary policies delivering all that has been promised. In particular, financial markets show a deep concern about the outlook for the budget deficit and the potential effect on monetary policy.”

But the deeper problem, Sprinkel contended, was the Federal Reserve’s own lack of credibility—“the skepticism about future monetary policy in the face of impending budget deficits.” Many years of disappointment had persuaded the financial markets not to count on the central bank to hold the line against an aggressive fiscal policy.21

Lawrence A. Kudlow, chief economist for the Office of Management and Budget, offered a similar analysis: “Significant increases in long-term interest rates cast doubt over the credibility of the Administration’s program.”22

But Sprinkel warned the White House policy makers to resist complaints from Congress and stand fast for a rigorous monetary policy. “Critics of the Administration’s economic policies have been calling for an easing of monetary policy as the solution to the current situation,” Sprinkel said. “Unfortunately, this view has been reinforced by the repeated references by Congress to the evils of high interest rates. This is simply an example of confusing a symptom (high interest rates) with the disease (inflation).”23

Sprinkel and the other monetarists believed, in fact, that interest rates were ultimately determined by market forces, not by Federal Reserve manipulation. The focus of monetary policy must be exclusively on M-l and the money supply, they insisted, and any attempts to bring down rates by injecting more money into the banking system would be quickly canceled out by the financial markets’ fears of inflation and upward pressure on market rates.

Economic history suggested, rather forcefully, that monetarists were simply wrong about the Fed and interest rates. After all, for a full decade in the 1940s, the Fed had demonstrated that it could hold interest rates absolutely flat if it wished—both short-term and long-term rates—despite the market pressures created by the huge wartime deficits. The Fed did so by pumping in more money—holding down the price by increasing the supply.

The monetarist logic, nevertheless, allowed the White House to blame the central bank’s performance for the bond-market debacle— not the President’s own program. By insisting that interest rates did not matter and only money did, Sprinkel and the others narrowly focused their critique on a single factor—the Fed’s month-to-month control of M-l.

And when they looked at M-l in early spring, the evidence seemed most disturbing. For three months, the basic money aggregate had expanded but it was still running well below its target for the year. If anything, money was already too tight in terms of the Fed’s own goals. But now, suddenly, M-l looked as if it were growing explosively again. During April, the primary money aggregate started expanding at an annual rate of 25 percent. White House suspicions seemed confirmed.

Was the Fed deliberately pumping up money again, despite its promises to the White House? Or was the Fed simply losing control, as it had in 1980? Either way, Sprinkel warned, if the surge continued, financial markets would be rattled further and long-term interest rates would be bid still higher. The President’s economic promises would be defeated by incompetence at the Federal Reserve.

Inside the White House, the monetarists sounded the alarm. Volcker and the Fed bureaucrats had never really believed in controlling the money aggregates, they complained. The Fed was targeting interest rates again, despite its public denials. At the weekly meetings with Fed officials, Sprinkel and others complained repeatedly about the central bank’s inconstancy.

There were strong arguments, strong debates [Fred Schultz said]. Beryl and Jerry [Jordan] would argue that we weren’t being tight enough. Kud-low was hammering on us too. I would say, “Look at M-l growth, it’s quite low for the year.” They would say, “Yeah, but you’re not really staying on those targets. You’re deviating.” We would say, “No, Beryl, if we stick closer to the targets, we will get more volatility [the lesson that Fed officials had learned from the 1980 roller coaster].” He would say, “You’ve got to stick precisely to the targets. If you do that, it would make things settle down.”

At the White House, the circle of senior presidential advisers picked up Sprinkel’s complaints and soon they were buzzing with indignation. Volcker was undermining the President. He mustn’t get away with this. Treasury Secretary Regan confided to an aide one day that he and the President had actually discussed “abolishing the Fed.”24

“We worked ourselves into a frenzy,” an important White House official said. “Volcker has to be told. First, we have to let him know he’s got to have a working relationship with us. He needs to work in harness with the White House. Second, we don’t want any more of his zooming money supply like we had in 1980, that caused the mess we’re still in.”

The Federal Reserve chairman would be called to account. Only the President himself could make Paul Volcker shape up.

The President sat in one of the big wing chairs in the Oval Office and opposite him, sprawled in the facing chair, was the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board. Lined along the couches were the President’s senior advisers: James A. Baker III, the White House chief of staff; Treasury Secretary Donald Regan; CEA chairman Murray Wei-denbaum; Edwin Meese; Martin Anderson; and David Stockman, the budget director.

“It was like a meeting with a visiting head of state from a foreign country,” Stockman complained. “Brief and formal and there wasn’t much real communication.”

Paul Volcker was an intimidating figure to these men. The Fed chairman was not ten feet tall (he was only six feet seven), but his reputation and expertise were as imposing as his physical stature. Volcker had more practical experience in governing than any of those who had just taken charge of the executive branch. He had served at Treasury when Lyndon Johnson entered the war in Indochina; he was devising international economic policy when Richard Nixon resigned from the Presidency. Volcker knew the real history of every issue and understood the subtle interplay of politicians and bureaucracies in Washington, the submerged game of power relationships. Furthermore, Paul Volcker’s domain—monetary policy—was itself a large mystery to most of the men gathered around the President.

Ronald Reagan, ironically, had a surer grasp of the subject than any of his senior political advisers—ironic because, in most realms of government policy, Reagan was a passive executive, with a weak grasp of details. He often left both the particulars and the strategic choices to his circle of advisers. They worked out a consensus among themselves, then brought the decision to him for ratification. When it came to money, however, Reagan knew what he wanted and expressed it forcefully.

“Most of the major players in the White House—Baker, Meese, Mike Deaver—don’t know much about monetary policy,” one of their colleagues explained. “The President probably has the most developed understanding of any of them.”

David Stockman elaborated the point:

The President has two metaphors he uses when he talks about monetary policy. One is “zooming the money supply,” which meant money was too easy. “Pulling the string” meant it was too tight. The President doesn’t have a lot of things right in his head. He is kind of selective about what facts he takes in. but one thing he really believes in deeply is anti-inflation. He used the same cliche over and over: “Inflation is like radioactivity. Once it starts, it spreads and grows.”

Ronald Reagan was a monetarist himself. That label had never been publicly applied to him in all his years as a candidate (perhaps because most political reporters were oblivious to the distinction), but Reagan’s campaign bromides clearly reflected his monetarist perspective. Inflation originated with the “printing press” money at the Federal Reserve, he said, and in order to brake inflation, the government must halt its excessive production of money.

This was one thing that the President knows in detail [Stockman said]. He could take a piece of paper and draw a line tracing the money-supply growth all the way back to the sixties. He had one thing that he knew and he always made the same point about the Federal Reserve. The money supply “zoomed” in every election year—“flooding the economy with money,” he said—and then, after the election, the Fed “pulled the string” and the economy went into recession.

Ronald Reagan had been tutored on the subject by Milton Friedman himself. Now that Reagan was President, Friedman continued as an outside economics adviser, one who dropped by the Oval Office regularly to offer his analysis and advice. The President did subscribe to one principle on money that conflicted with the Friedman doctrine. Like the supply siders in Congress, Reagan privately advocated restoration of the gold standard as the ultimate way of guaranteeing stable money. “You can’t control inflation as long as you have fiat money,” he told his aides. The President’s attachment to gold was almost never mentioned in public, however. His political advisers feared that it would sound “kooky” and “old-fashioned” to voters.

The President was fully prepped for the meeting with Volcker, but he delivered to the Federal Reserve chairman the same speech on money that White House aides had heard many times in private. The problem, Reagan told Volcker, was the “zooming” money supply, following by “pulling the string” too tight.

“The President took his finger and drew the chart of the money supply in the air for Volcker,” Stockman said. What was needed, the President told the Fed chairman, was not a line that zigzagged up and down, but a smooth, steady line that moved upward at a moderate pace.

Volcker, another Administration official remarked, “would have found the President rather abstract. In terms of dealing with the President, Volcker could get a sense that this guy is just interested in the abstractions and the abstractions are sufficiently trite that he could live with it.”

Volcker had already taken the measure of the Reagan advisers in his regular meetings with them. “If the President asked him to listen to his advisers,” the official explained, “Volcker could say to himself: ‘This Administration does not have a coherent view and, if we want one, I know more than these jokers.’”

The Federal Reserve chairman listened respectfully to the President and responded with his own cliches. He gave a rambling, disjointed discourse on the Federal Reserve’s policy goals. He emphasized the uncertainties surrounding M-l and the other monetary aggregates. He discussed potential operating problems associated with the various technical changes demanded by the monetarists.25

“I said to myself, ‘The President isn’t going to understand this,’ and, sure enough, he didn’t,” Stockman related. “The President went into his own circular arguments about controlling money. Volcker replied, ‘Yes, we’re controlling the money aggregates, but we think the numbers may be high for other reasons and these other operating procedures are overrated and so on.’”

When Volcker departed, Stockman thought the Oval Office showdown was a great disappointment. “The meeting turned into mush— all mush,” he said. Volcker had not given his commitment to cooperate with the White House economic policy. He hadn’t even been asked for one.

Some of the other presidential advisers, however, were pleased. The message had been delivered with sufficient force and clarity that Volcker would have to respond. Within a few days, the grapevine of monetarist economists, inside and outside the government, was gossiping about the stern lecture that Ronald Reagan had delivered to Paul Volcker. The President, they were told, demanded that the Fed shape up.

Beryl Sprinkel, for one, expressed a new confidence that the Fed would bring money growth under control. “They can,” Sprinkel said. “The question is: will they? I believe they will.”

“We have had many frank discussions about the Federal Reserve in the last few months,” Sprinkel told a meeting of financial executives in Chicago. “I am now convinced that the Fed will meet its stated objective.”26

Volcker himself did not remember any stern lectures from the President, then or at any other time. But the chairman certainly got the drift of what the White House wanted. He must have also recognized an implicit political threat for the Federal Reserve.

Stockman, initially disappointed, concluded that the summit meeting with Volcker had some effect, after all. “Volcker is now trying to make peace with the White House,” he reported to colleagues.27

The President’s message, technical details aside, was not that complicated. “Volcker couldn’t have come out of that meeting,” Stockman said, “thinking anything but that the White House wanted tightening.”

In mid-April, before a university audience in Kansas, Paul Volcker was explaining once again what the Federal Reserve was doing. The money-supply growth rates would be steadily reduced, year by year, until inflation was squeezed out of the economy. But the chairman added a reassuring promise: the reduction would be done gradually, he said, “not all at once, but over a period of years.”

This was an important point. If money was squeezed abruptly, that might produce a dramatic decline in inflation, but it would also overwhelm the people and enterprises whose prices were bound up in contracts and commitments—wage agreements, bank loans, sales contracts. Gradualism would be slower but less wrenching for innocent economic players who had entered transactions in good faith, assuming that price inflation would continue into the future.

“The purpose,” Volcker explained, “is to permit some time for the economy, for personal behavior and for existing contracts to adjust to the prospect of a slower rate of growth of price increase and eventual stability. ‘Shock treatment’ may be more dramatic—but not necessarily more effective over time.”

People would be given time to adjust. Businessmen would see that the steady deceleration of prices was real and revise their expectations for future loans, wages, prices. Once everyone understood the new direction, the inflationary fever would subside. The economy would back off its demands for higher wages, higher prices. “What is essential,” Volcker said, “is that there be widespread appreciation of our intentions and our ability and will to carry them out.”28

Among the Federal Reserve governors, Nancy Teeters was the most persistent advocate of the gradual approach. She did not argue that a recession could be avoided, but she was more sensitive than the others to the particular groups that would suffer most directly from a sterner policy.

I invoked every argument I could think of [she said]. Small business was suffering because they had to borrow at the prime plus. Housing was dead and autos. The consumer didn’t have any strength left at all and unemployment was rising. My intuitive feeling was that the same results would be accomplished with lower rates. It would take a little longer but probably more small businesses would survive.

Teeters’s perspective did not prevail. The Federal Reserve chairman did not keep his promise.

Assuming Volcker’s assurances were sincere, either he changed his mind abruptly or he erred in his execution of money regulation. For in the coming weeks, for whatever reason, the Fed did the opposite of what the chairman had promised. By May, the economy was slowing down appreciably, weakened by the high interest rates that the Fed had imposed for nearly six months. The Federal Reserve, nevertheless, decided to tighten further. The Fed would push interest rates even higher.

That was what the White House said it wanted. That was also what the bond market wanted, as well as the commercial bankers on the advisory council. Any hesitation among the Fed governors was brushed aside. The technical doubts were resolved in favor of an even sterner policy. Promises of gradualism were permanently discarded.

About the same time, thirty or forty Wall Street financial experts were invited to the Fed for a private two-day seminar on monetary policy. John Paulus, the analyst from Morgan Stanley and a former Fed staff economist, was struck in particular by what Volcker had to say to the group. It was a clear signal of his intentions.

“Volcker told us,” Paulus said, “that since the policy mistakes in the past have been made on the side of excessive ease, in the future, if we err, it makes sense to err on the side of restraint.”

That was what happened at the next meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee.

America’s money always became confused in April. Families were paying their income taxes, many drawing down savings accounts in order to mail a check to Washington. At the same time, the government was sending out tax refunds to millions of other citizens. With all these billions of dollars sloshing back and forth in the mail and between bank accounts, the April statistics on the money supply were notoriously quirky. In any other year, when M-l surged abruptly in April, the Fed might simply have tolerated it, waiting to see if this was a real trend or merely a statistical aberration of the tax season.

This year, they were not so patient. On May 6, members of the Federal Open Market Committee were consulted in a telephone conference call on how to deal with the M-l problem. They agreed to let the Federal Funds rate rise above its target range. The expansion of money and credit would be dampened by making money more expensive. In the second week of May, this key interest rate controlled by the central bank jumped more than 260 basis points—above 18 percent.

Notwithstanding the sudden surge of M-l, every other visible signal indicated that money and credit were tightening—not easing. Shortterm interest rates were being bid up in the money market. Commercial banks were borrowing more heavily at the Discount window. The rate of inflation, moreover, was already beginning to moderate. In March, inflation fell below double digits and stayed there for the first-time in two years. By April, inflation had subsided to 7.2 percent. The Fed, nevertheless, made money tighter still.

When the Federal Open Market Committee gathered for its regular meeting on May 18, the debate was preoccupied with technical confusion over exactly what the money numbers meant. In addition to April’s usual uncertainties, the money-supply aggregates were now distorted by the banking innovations authorized in the financial deregulation legislation of 1980. At the beginning of 1981, NOW accounts became available nationwide at commercial banks—checking accounts that paid interest. That altered the economic meaning of M-l.

Billions of dollars flowed into the new NOW accounts, some transferred from the regular demand deposits counted as M-l and some from savings accounts counted in the less liquid aggregate known as M-2. NOW accounts were included in M-l because people could write checks on them and spend the money in immediate transactions. Yet, because they paid interest, the NOW accounts also resembled the old-fashioned savings accounts or money-market funds counted as M-2— invested money that would not flow quickly into the transactions of regular commerce. What did this hybrid brand of M-l mean for the economy? Did people intend to spend this money promptly or were they just parking idle savings in NOW accounts for the added convenience?

For many months, various Keynesian economists had complained that if the Federal Reserve was going to follow the monetarist approach to regulating money, it had chosen the worst possible time to do so. Financial deregulation permitted all sorts of innovations in banking habits and the money numbers were scrambled by them, not just the meaning of M-l but the other aggregates too. The Fed would be led into error again and again, the liberal critics warned, as the composition of M-l and M-2 changed in new and unpredictable ways.

Frank Morris, president of the Boston Federal Reserve Bank, agreed with the critics:

You could see what was happening to money [Morris said]. People would have a NOW account and a savings account, both paying practically the same interest rate. But the NOW account is checkable. So you close down the savings account and put the money in NOW. You now have money counted in M-l that is not really a transaction account. As time goes on, we get more and more of these things. With various innovations, you can write checks on accounts that are counted in all three Ms.

The traditional definitions of money were literally breaking down. The fine distinctions that monetary economists relied upon to decide money-supply questions were being obliterated, in unpredictable ways, as private depositors changed their behavior, reacting to the new banking possibilities authorized in the 1980 legislation. The economic relevance of M-l was now unknown.

Yet the Federal Reserve had committed itself, starting back in 1979, to faithfully adhere to M-l as its policy guide. Volcker’s conversion to a monetarist operating approach was premised on the confident assertion that a given quantity of M-l would produce a predictable level of activity in the larger economy. Some Federal Reserve officials doubted this from the start. But now they knew for certain it was not true.

Just as the Keynesians had warned, the Fed was trying to steer the economy by an inherently unstable variable—an economic number that had lost its meaning. Once M-l was contaminated by the idle savings money alongside active spending money, the basic aggregate looked artificially larger than it really was, in terms of what level of economic activity it would permit. The statistics could be dangerously misleading if the Federal Open Market Committee continued to follow M-l obediently. By holding down M-l growth, the Fed might be squeezing the American economy tighter than even it intended.

The private reaction at the Fed was anguish and a little chagrin. It seemed ludicrous for the central bank to continue following a wayward lodestar, especially since several of the leading governors had never themselves believed that the money aggregates were a reliable guide. Yet to admit the dilemma and abandon Volcker’s operating system would be embarrassing too. The FOMC members decided instead to plunge forward, improvising and rationalizing.

In the technocratic tradition, the problem would be resolved by rational calculation. Fed technicians had devised a new money aggregate called “shift-adjusted M-1B” that attempted to compensate for the distortions caused by NOW accounts. Except no one, including the Fed technicians, really knew how much distortion there was. So they made an estimate. The M-l debate could now continue, using a new label, M-1B, that suggested more scientific certitude than existed. Some senior Fed officials began to worry about where Volcker’s commitment to monetarism was leading them.29

“A lot of us talked privately about getting ourselves into a monetarist trap,” said Peter Fousek, executive vice president at the New York Fed. “We had the whole world looking at the money numbers and taking them too seriously. How are we going to get out of the monetarist box after the country has been sold on the idea that the money numbers are so important? Yet you know they are giving you wrong signals.”30

At the May meeting of the FOMC, however, Volcker and the two governors most respected for their analytical skills stoutly defended the operating system and offered a different interpretation of what the Ms were signaling. Prior to the April surge, M-l’s growth had been running below target for months. But the broader aggregate that included savings accounts, M-2, was running in the middle of its target range. People were also pouring funds into M-2’s money-market accounts in order to reap the returns offered by the high interest rates. This included not just savings but money they probably intended to spend. Thus, the governors reasoned, the rapid growth of M-2 was signaling that money was actually too loose. The Fed, they suggested, should temporarily focus on M-2’s high growth, instead of M-l, as the correct indicator.

When Lyle Gramley and Henry Wallich both came to the defense of Volcker’s monetarist approach, their opinions carried special weight with their colleagues on the FOMC—since neither of them, it was understood, was a true believer. Wallich and Gramley, however, improvised similar interpretations of the Ms that would justify tightening the money supply still further. People, they theorized, were dumping funds into M-2 money-market funds to collect the extraordinary interest returns, but actually these people intended to spend a lot of this money. Therefore, Wallich proposed, the FOMC should arbitrarily assume that a portion of M-2 was really M-l.

“I argued,” Gramley said, “that the effective money growth was actually faster than what the numbers on the aggregates showed.” Both men, as it turned out, were grossly mistaken.

Their rationales were influenced, however, by another factor unrelated to the mechanics of money—their fear that the Federal Reserve might be embarrassed once again if it did not stand by its promises and try to make Volcker’s techniques work. “Had one known we were going into a pretty sluggish period,” Wallich conceded afterward, “we might have had a policy that was less tight. But the effectiveness of the new techniques was being called into question and that was very much in our minds. What else could we do?”

Frank Morris, for one, argued the question repeatedly with his colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee and always lost. “We were following a false god,” Morris complained. “The others would say to me, ‘Granted, we’re having some problems with M-l, but this is only a temporary phenomenon. The dust is going to settle soon and we will return to normal.’ I heard this at every FOMC meeting. I think it’s a lot of baloney.”

Morris had been president of the Boston Fed since 1968, which made him senior among the twelve Reserve Bank presidents. Educated at Michigan by Keynesian economists, he came to Washington to work in the Truman Administration and stayed through John F. Kennedy, with a tour in between doing international economic analysis for the Central Intelligence Agency. Morris was more urbane than most Fed bankers and his sophisticated taste was reflected in the Boston Fed’s extraordinary building near the waterfront. The gleaming tower won architectural prizes, but the design seemed audacious for a public building, too smart and handsome for such a staid old institution as the Federal Reserve. For economic advice, Frank Morris stayed in close touch with the liberal Keynesians on the faculties of Harvard and MIT.

Morris’s perspective on monetary policy, in fact, was the traditional view at the Fed—before Chairman Volcker had converted everyone to the money aggregates. His colleagues, Morris grumbled, were now enthralled by the same “mystique of money” that had so long obsessed their monetarist critics. It was as if Fed policy makers had been taken in by their own propaganda. Many of them had opted for the monetarist approach mainly because it would give them political cover for imposing high interest rates—the Fed could say it was regulating M-l, not interest rates. Now the Fed seemed hooked on the money numbers too.

Morris couldn’t shake the faith, though he insisted that most of his colleagues, including Volcker, knew better. The Fed could not control M-l fluctuations as monetarists imagined. More to the point, the M-l fluctuations did not matter to the real economy. Interest rates and credit expansion were what guided things.

I don’t think money itself has any causal relationship to nominal GNP [Morris explained]. The dominating causal force is interest rates. If rates go up, you can naturally expect the money supply to go down because economic activity declines and because you’ve raised the opportunity cost of holding money. Most members of the FOMC, if you faced them with this causal question, would not disagree.

Morris’s arguments were never a match for the authority of Paul Volcker, seconded by influential governors like Gramley and Wallich. The Federal Open Market Committee accepted the chairman’s interpretation of events and agreed to come down hard on the surge in M-l. Ironically, if the Fed had been basing its policy on interest rates instead of monetary aggregates, there would have been little argument: credit conditions obviously were already abnormally tight and growing tighter, even as they met. The Fed, instead, stuck with the money numbers. The policy makers adopted a directive that ordered a “substantial deceleration” of money growth—strong language compared with the bland phrases usually contained in the FOMC’s policy decisions. As Volcker saw it: M-l was rising again. He decided to step on it.

The results were dramatic: the year-old expansion of the American economy was finally broken. By July, the nation’s gross economic output would peak and the country was once again plunged into recession—a second contraction in two years, both induced by the punishing interest rates imposed by the Federal Reserve.

For whatever it was worth, the Fed did get M-l under control. M-l —or, rather, shift-adjusted M-1B—not only stopped growing in May, it declined sharply, by $4 billion. The basic money supply shrank in May at an annual rate of 11 percent. It shrank by an additional 2 percent in June. In fact, it would be six months before the Federal Reserve allowed M-l to grow again. Not until November would the money aggregate return to the same level it had reached in April.

This was equivalent to slamming hard on the brakes—driving up interest rates by choking off supply. Interest rates responded accordingly. The Federal Funds rate climbed above 19 percent and stayed there through most of the summer. The economy was already weakening under the cumulative burden of six months of high interest rates. The additional jolt administered by the Fed in May became the final blow that finished the job.

Within a few weeks after the May meeting, it became obvious that the FOMC’s reading of the monetary aggregates had been mistaken. The Fed had misinterpreted its own money signals rather than conceding that they were too confused to be reliable.

“By July,” said Governor Charles Partee, “you could see that April had been just a seasonal blip and there was considerable slackening in the aggregates.”

“What else could we do?” Henry Wallich lamented. “We could have abandoned the reserve technique. Then we would have avoided the recession. And what rate of inflation would we have wound up with?”

The Federal Open Market Committee was wrong about the economy as well as the money numbers—an error of judgment that led to large and painful consequences for the nation. The dimensions of the mistakes were defined in the Fed’s own words, its published reports and minutes. Month after month in the first half of 1981, the FOMC minutes revealed misinterpretations of the diverging monetary aggregates, and also misjudgments of what was happening to the real economy. In its report to Congress at the beginning of the year, the FOMC had agreed to hold M-l growth to a target range of 3.5 to 6 percent. In the event, the Fed actually held adjusted M-l to only 2.3 percent growth. After years of overshooting the money targets, this time the Fed erred on the hard side.

Nothing in the Fed’s official record would suggest, furthermore, that the Federal Open Market Committee expected that its decision to tighten would tip the economy into recession (see Appendix C for minutes of the May 18, 1981, FOMC meeting). On the contrary, the FOMC reported: “While generally anticipating a substantial slowing of growth from the exceptionally rapid pace now indicated for the first quarter, a number of members expressed the view that expansion in activity over the rest of the year was likely to continue to exceed the rates typically being forecast.”

Michael G. Hadjimichalakis, a University of Washington economist who was a visiting scholar at the Federal Reserve Board for two years during this period, published a meticulous analysis of the policy record of FOMC decisions and arrived at harsh conclusions. “The Fed became lost in a maze of unnecessary detail, mostly of its own creation, in order to follow the monetarist prescriptions,” he wrote. Hadjimicha-lakis’s critique was virtually unknown to political Washington, but his analysis was widely read among the Federal Reserve’s staff economists, with a mixture of agreement and rejection and injured pride.

Leading up to the recession, he noted, the FOMC consistently ignored the contractionary signals coming from M-l each month and misconstrued the meaning of M-2 as well. Each month, the policy makers found new reasons for disregarding the deterioration of the real economy and, instead, searched for evidence of expansionary dangers. Hadjimichalakis’s scholarly analysis of Fed errors, couched in the neutral prose of economics, added up to a devastating commentary:

We must emphasize that the Fed’s intended disinflation is not at issue here. At issue is the extra and unintended disinflation that resulted from the Fed’s errors. Of course, it is true . . . that the members of the FOMC, following monetarist prescriptions, repeatedly preferred to err on the side of fighting inflation rather than fighting the looming recession. Nevertheless, the economic depression of 1981-82 was mostly unintentional.

Hadjimichalakis surmised that the Federal Reserve was driven into its fateful mistakes by embarrassment over its own inept performance of 1980—when Volcker attempted to apply monetarist procedures and wound up producing even more erratic swings in money growth and interest rates. “Although the economic consequences of these errors [in 1980] were relatively minor,” Hadjimichalakis explained, “the Fed became vulnerable to monetarist criticism and the Fed’s reaction to criticism of these errors, the adoption of even stronger monetarist principles, later caused additional and crucial errors. These latter errors were responsible for the economic depression of 1981-82.”31

For modern Americans, taught to believe in the efficacy of technocratic government, this presented a disturbing picture—the failure of powerful experts. The faceless technocrats of the central bank, priestly regulators of money, had committed a series of miscalculations and wrong predictions. Their mistakes were compounded as they kept adjusting their own operating premises, struggling to defend the logical appearance of what they were doing. For the nation, the result would be economic distress on an epic scale—a deep recession, rising unemployment, personal and business failures rippling through the society. Was it all, then, an accident?

The Federal Reserve governors were not as incompetent as their own technical record made them seem. While the critique of the Federal Reserve’s decisions was documented in the Fed’s own official reports, this evidence did not tell the whole story of the logic driving the Federal Open Market Committee’s decisions. There was another dimension to the Fed’s policy making, one that was largely unspoken and subjective and never—never—reflected in the FOMC’s official minutes. The Federal Reserve was not simply a group of neutral technocrats exercising its best expertise on money and banking. It was also a political institution, a distinct power center within the government, defending its own prerogatives and reacting to the political currents surrounding it.

The other, unspoken dimension was politics. When the political context was considered, the Fed’s supposed errors began to make more sense. As economic choices, the monetary decisions made in the spring of 1981 were clearly flawed. The technocrats failed in terms of their own analysis. As bureaucratic politicians, protecting their own institution from political harm and pursuing larger goals, on the other hand, Volcker and his colleagues knew what they were doing.

In political terms, the Fed was on precarious ground, pressured from several angles at once. The White House had staked out its hardline critique, both in public and in private. The financial markets remained deeply skeptical that the central bank meant to keep its word. Economists generally were warning that the Reagan tax cuts and large deficits would give new momentum to inflationary expectations. Bankers and the bond market agreed. The Fed’s own shaky performance in 1980 was very much on everyone’s mind. If inflation came roaring back, the Federal Reserve would be blamed, more emphatically than ever before.

The political nervousness at the Fed was reflected in Vice Chairman Frederick Schultz’s trip to St. Louis. Larry Roos, president of the St. Louis Fed, the bastion of monetarism inside the System, had been making many speeches, complaining that his colleagues on the FOMC were not being sufficiently faithful to the doctrine and echoing the same criticisms heard from the Reagan White House. Volcker worried that Roos’s constant attacks were undermining the Fed’s position. Fred Schultz said he would deal with it.

The vice chairman called on the St. Louis Fed’s board of directors and, in so many words, asked its members to muzzle their feisty president. “Look, we’re in a helluva battle now,” Schultz told the Reserve Bank directors, “and we’re all in the same boat. We at the board in Washington may not be as monetarist as you would like, but we’re all on the same side. We should argue in the board meetings, but close ranks in public.”

The St. Louis board prevailed on its president “to be less of a maverick,” as Roos himself put it.

When the governors and Reserve Bank presidents convened as the Federal Open Market Committee, they observed “a very high degree of self-conscious rectitude,” as one FOMC staff assistant put it. Politics was never discussed in the formal meetings, except in the most oblique manner. It was not done. To bring up outside political pressures at the board table, when the subject was disinterested economic analysis, would be an affront to the independent posture of the institution.

This did not prevent FOMC members from talking politics during the lunch break, however. As the staff assistant said:

After the vote, there’s a break with lunch eaten at the board table, and very often that’s the only time when the presidents and governors will discuss political contacts. They will have a more explicit discussion of political reactions then, but it’s not part of the official meeting. This is part of a deliberate effort to have the meetings appear to be completely free of political discussion. The politics doesn’t get articulated until after the meeting, but everyone understands that the politics is involved in the decisions.

During the lunch break at the May meeting, the FOMC members talked at length about the political subtext for their decision—the pressures confronting them, particularly the monetarist attacks from the Reagan Administration. The discussion, according to the FOMC staffer, went like this:

What do these attacks mean for the future? We are going to see more of this, probably. Are we happy enough with the 1979 policy to use it to resist pressure to move in a direction we don’t want to move? We don’t want to be seen as responding to the Administration, so we must be sure we have a sound, theoretical basis for our policy. In other words, do it for the right reasons, not because they are leaning on us.

All of the outside pressures pushed the Fed in the same direction— toward a tougher policy. The safest ground for the Federal Reserve would be to demonstrate that, whatever else went wrong, the Fed was diligently keeping its word. If doubts persisted about the Fed’s commitment and competence, better to err on the hard side. If Reagan’s tax cuts threatened to reignite inflationary fever, better to lean against it in advance.

“The White House drumbeat did encourage us to be tighter than we would have been without it,” said a senior officer of the Boston Fed who attended FOMC meetings.

“I guess I would be harder on the Fed than that,” his colleague, a senior economist, interjected. “If we had wanted to be easier, we could have been easier. This was the time when the economic miracle was going to happen and tight money was supposed to be part of that. It was very hard to argue against it. This was a new Administration having its honeymoon—give them what they want and hope for the best.”

Dan Brill, the retired research director and mentor to many of the Fed’s senior officers, was critical too. “I accuse the Fed of having a circle-the-wagons mentality,” Brill said. “All the Sprinkel crowd did was confirm that mentality. All that happens at the Fed when you get that kind of attack is you circle the wagons tighter.”

Even so, the White House pressure might have been resisted if the bond market had been pulling in an opposite direction. In this instance, both institutions wanted the same thing from the central bankers. Political scientists liked to search for evidence of political influence on the Fed, and when they found it, they concluded that, by and large, the Fed did respond to the White House or to Congress. This legitimized the anomalous arrangement, they suggested, since, in a vague and shadowy manner, the central bank did seem responsive to the elected government. But there was a more interesting question about the Fed’s independence, a more fundamental test of its political behavior. It was posed in situations where the political community and the financial markets were in conflict, demanding contrary policies. Whom did the Fed listen to then—when it had to choose between Washington and Wall Street?

In the fall of 1979, when this test occurred, the answer had been Wall Street. Jimmy Carter’s advisers had urged Paul Volcker not to adopt the rigid monetarist approach, but the Fed chairman had felt secure enough to go ahead with his initiative, despite White House objections, knowing that the financial markets would applaud. The same test would be posed again at crucial moments in the Reagan Presidency, but in the spring-of-1981 instance, the Fed policy makers were protected on both flanks. Their interpretation of the money numbers, however flawed as economic analysis, permitted the Federal Open Market Committee to tighten money again, which was precisely what both the bond market and the White House wanted.

Paul Volcker was often praised for his political courage, but in this instance, it might have taken more courage to resist. In any case, the other FOMC members usually deferred to his political judgments. They had the luxury of arguing technical issues, but he represented the Fed in politics. “The chairman is the daddy,” an FOMC staff assistant explained. “He is the one who’s got to make the decision and live with it. He is the one who will have to do the explaining when we get attacked. The others on the FOMC have more freedom to be irresponsible . . . but they leave it to the chairman to say, ‘That won’t wash in the real world.’”

1

know [he conceded] that, in concept, a case can be made that restraint on money and credit alone, sustained long enough and strongly enough, could control inflation and thus lay the ground for renewed growth. But is





Volcker’s sensibilities nearly always shaped the final decision. “Volcker didn’t decide to take away the punch bowl just as the party was getting good,” one of his aides joked. “He came in and hit it with a hammer.”

Earlier in the spring of 1981, the French ambassador called on Anthony Solomon, president of the New York Fed, and asked him what his outlook was for the American economy. The new government of Frangois Mitterrand was taking power in Paris and France’s economic policy would necessarily be influenced by what direction the United States, the locomotive of the world’s economy, intended to take.

I told him the U.S. was going into recession [Solomon said]. The French finance minister asked the same question at Treasury and was told that a great boom was ahead in America. I later learned that Mitterrand, at his first Cabinet meeting, announced that his government could pursue an expansionist policy because the U.S. would be booming. He was told that I was predicting a contraction. Mitterrand said, “Let’s go ahead and take the expansionist route because the Treasury has given us irrevocable assurances.” He was warned that it was a gamble. They went ahead anyway and, of course, they got clobbered.

The awkward little secret of the American system was that modern recessions did not flow ineluctably from mysterious natural forces in the business cycle. Recessions were induced by the federal government. In the seven recessions since World War II, the same transaction had preceded each contraction: the Federal Reserve’s decision to force up interest rates to an abnormal level. If it kept them there long enough, the economy would inevitably decline. Given that power equation, it was natural for Tony Solomon to understand what lay ahead for the American economy even if the Secretary of the Treasury did not.

For months, Nancy Teeters had also assumed recession was imminent. So did Governor Charles Partee and Governor Emmett Rice. “Nobody wishes to see hardship,” Rice explained. “Nobody likes to see people lose their jobs and GNP stop growing. But, sometimes, given developments, it’s inevitable.”

The crucial development, of course, was at the Federal Reserve itself. In broad terms, the governors could argue that they had no choice, given their commitment to curb price inflation. In specific terms, however, it was not price inflation that broke the economic expansion and forced a contraction. It was the high interest rates engineered by the Fed.

“You’re always going to take a risk of a recession when you’re in this process,” Volcker acknowledged. “It’s always a question of when. If you’re never going to take that risk, you’re not going to do anything and end up with recession anyway.”

This distinction was an important refuge for Fed governors. Yes, they would concede, they put the economy at risk, pushed it toward the cliff. But that’s not the same as saying they deliberately provoked recession. To people who experienced the consequences, it would seem a distinction without much difference.

For obvious reasons, the Fed never declared their expectations in advance. Its policy makers might agree informally among themselves that their policy was steering the economy into recession (or they might confide in the French ambassador), but they never informed the public of what was about to happen to it, except for those oblique comments on “necessary pain” and “substantial adjustments” ahead. If Americans clearly understood the connection, the Fed would find it much more difficult to do what it wanted to do. Secrecy and evasion were considered necessary to the task.32

Other branches of government also had an interest in obscuring the reality. If people understood the government itself was inducing recession, the President and Congress would also be in an awkward position —dodging angry questions from the public about why they let the Fed do this to it. If Washington was planning a recession, why didn’t the government at least say so in clear, straightforward terms so people could protect themselves? The independence of the Federal Reserve was, in fact, a way for elected representatives to evade responsibility for these events. If things got bad enough, politicians would attack the Fed and the Fed would stoically accept its role as public scapegoat. That was part of the arrangement too.

The government’s general silence on this question, the absence of fair warning and full debate, preempted all the reasonable questions that might have been asked about whether the Federal Reserve was doing the right thing. The general public undoubtedly agreed that double-digit inflation must be curbed somehow, but if the question was examined fully, it was not at all clear that a deep recession was the best way to deal with this disorder. Certainly, it was not the only way. The 1981 inflation, for instance, was driven by escalating prices in oil and agriculture, both of which might have been contained temporarily by direct controls and other aggressive government policies. Some people would have been hurt but far fewer people.

By evading the question, the political community did not have to examine the alternatives or which interests would be most injured by the Federal Reserve’s method. Every solution, of course, had costs, but the political debate was never asked to compare them, was never in a position to choose which solution might do the least damage to the largest number of people or to the economy as a whole. Instead, the Federal Reserve went ahead and applied its own familiar remedy for inflation—inducing a deep recession. Millions of citizens and hundreds of thousands of business enterprises would discover that this particular cure was far worse than the affliction.

While ordinary citizens could not expect a timely warning from any part of the government, they were not entirely defenseless. People could watch interest rates for themselves and make their own curbstone judgments about what the Federal Reserve really intended for the economy (though without much help from the press—it obscured the reality too). One reasonably simple rule applied: when the Fed pushed short-term rates higher than long-term rates and held them there long enough, recession was sure to follow. If three-month T-bills, for instance, were paying a higher yield than twenty-year bonds, then people should expect the worst. Short-term financial assets logically earn smaller returns than long-term ones, and so it was an unnatural condition when short rates were pushed higher than long rates—an “inverted yield curve” in the market parlance. It did not happen unless the Federal Reserve made it happen.

Like most economic rules, this one had blind spots. It could not, for instance, predict exactly when the recession would begin. Twenty years before, an inversion of short and long rates could produce a contraction after only two or three months. As inflation escalated and people became inured to higher and higher levels of interest, the impact took much longer. In 1981, the Fed held short-term rates well above long-term rates for eight months before the burden finally exhausted the economy. Fed governors could say, quite sincerely, they did not know when the recession would start. But they were being disingenuous if they claimed to be surprised.

“I don’t think anyone could think for one minute that you could produce a sharp deceleration of the money supply without causing a recession,” Frank Morris of the Boston Fed said. “It can’t be done.

. . . I don’t think anyone in the Federal Reserve was naive enough to think that.”

In early June, the President’s senior advisers gathered in chief of staff James Baker’s office and listened to the gloomy portents from the economists. Jerry Jordan, the monetarist member of the CEA, and Larry Kudlow, Stockman’s economic analyst at the budget office, joined to deliver their warning: the “rosy scenario” devised back in February for the U.S. economy had failed to materialize. It was time to face facts, before it was too late.

“This forecast is garbage,” Kudlow declared. “We’re going to take a recession and have huge deficits.”

Jordan and Kudlow summarized the situation for a group that included Baker, Edwin Meese, Treasury Secretary Regan and assorted economists. The Federal Reserve, they explained, was vigorously restraining money and growth in nominal GNP, just as the President and his men had asked. But the miracle of “rational expectations,” the vast psychological shift of investors and other interests, had simply not occurred, and Volcker’s predicted collision was at hand. Inflation was slowly subsiding, yes, but the real economy was sinking faster, headed for recession.

Lower nominal GNP and a shrinking economy naturally meant smaller tax revenues for the federal government. In Kudlow’s estimate, the bottom line was: the Reagan program was going to produce not a balanced budget but larger and larger federal deficits—in the range of $100 billion or more in each of the next three years.

Kudlow and Jordan urged the White House to accept reality and acknowledge the effects in its midyear revision of the budget forecast required in July. For Jordan and the monetarists, this downward adjustment in economic prospects would eliminate the embarrassing monetary-policy numbers that didn’t add up. For the Office of Management and Budget, such an acknowledgment would begin to reconcile the public to the prospect of much larger deficits than anyone in the Reagan Administration had previously intimated.

“There’s no such thing as a painless cure for inflation,” Kudlow said. “Jordan and I argued that the costs were coming first and the long-term benefits would come later. It would be better to acknowledge it instead of being embarrassed later.”33

But Treasury’s supply siders argued strenuously against any changes in the Administration’s published forecast. “Lowering the growth projections,” Paul Craig Roberts wrote, “would widen the deficit at an inopportune time—just at the point of congressional decision on the President’s tax bill. Treasury did not think Congress would pass the tax bill if it seemed that the Administration expected the deficit to grow rather than the economy.” Roberts even proposed that the Administration raise its growth estimates—making the future look even rosier.

An extended, intense argument developed between the two sides: should the President disclose an honest account of what the Administration expected or maintain the public fiction at least until Congress approved the massive tax cuts? It was one of those pivotal moments in political history when the decision would cast its shadow forward over many years to come—much as Lyndon Johnson’s deception about the true cost of the Vietnam War in 1966 had distorted the economy for the decade that followed.34

If the Reagan White House had chosen to state the true consequences of its tax reductions at that moment, the 1980s might have been utterly different. Congress might well have balked at the tax cuts. Or the President might at least have been compelled to moderate his tax proposal. At the very minimum, federal deficits would not have soared to $200 billion a year, doubling the national debt in five years. The recession still would have occurred, but as Paul Volcker had warned obliquely six months earlier, interest rates might have been considerably lower. Less damage would have been inflicted on debtors generally and on the interest-sensitive sectors of the economy.

Between Baker and Meese, the President’s senior policy makers decided not to disclose the new deficit forecast. The “rosy scenario” would be maintained as the official version of what the Reagan program would do for the economy, at least until after the tax bill was enacted. Afterward, they could deal with the problem of what the Reagan program was doing to the federal budget.

Kudlow described the fateful decision: “Baker said to me, ‘Kudlow, I believe you’re right, but I’m going to have to deal with that later. The President wants a tax cut and I can’t publish this forecast now.’ I said to him, ‘Once the die is cast, you can’t turn back.’”

David Stockman also concluded, with hindsight, that this decision was a final turning point that led inexorably to the massive deficits of the 1980s. “Passage of the tax bill was by no means certain at that point,” Stockman said, “and the political decision was made to stick with the old forecast even though it was wrong.” The Reagan White House’s short-term political objective prevailed over the long-term truth, much as had occurred fifteen years earlier in Lyndon Johnson’s White House.

The President himself was not consulted. He was not even informed by his own economic advisers that they now realized the Reagan economic recovery program was going to produce disastrous fiscal consequences. This omission partly reflected Reagan’s distance from the real strategic decisions of his own government, his indifference to the operational complexities of managing the economy. But it also reflected the jockeying for favor among all the President’s men.

Kudlow, for one, thought that somebody should have at least told Ronald Reagan. Let the President make the decision. “All these guys were trying to curry favor with the king,” Kudlow explained, “and they said to themselves: ‘The king wants to cut taxes, let’s figure out how to do that.’ None of them wanted to give the king the bad news.”

Through the weeks of early summer, the budget estimates turned steadily worse for the White House. As the Reagan program advanced toward congressional approval, the original package of budget cuts proposed in February grew smaller and smaller as Congress moderated and rejected many of the reductions. Meanwhile, the President’s proposal for tax cuts got larger and larger. Reagan had asked for $41 billion in spending cuts, but the final package would be roughly half that size. The original tax proposal would have cost $540 billion in lost revenue over five years, but it grew by roughly $200 billion. In the political competition with Democrats, a bidding war over tax breaks developed between the two political parties. The personal-income-tax reduction was scaled back to 25 percent over three years, but both sides offered more and larger tax concessions to business interest groups in order to win votes in the House and Senate. The final tax measure would lose approximately $750 billion. The net effect— greater loss of revenue combined with smaller savings on the spending side of the ledger—meant that even Kudlow’s $100 billion deficit estimates would prove much too low.

Paul Volcker was as distressed as anyone else by the unraveling of the Reagan promises. Officially, the Federal Reserve endorsed the Reagan tax program, at least in general terms. Nevertheless, Volcker and his vice chairman, Fred Schultz, began discreetly lobbying senators and representatives, warning them to think twice before they voted for such a massive loss of government revenue.

Representative Henry Reuss, chairman of the House Banking Committee, thought that Volcker should have been much more forthright in his warnings. Public opposition from the Federal Reserve chairman might have changed the political atmosphere, made it easier for members of Congress to resist. “If Volcker had that much independence in his system,” Reuss said, “he would have showed it in the summer of 1981. Instead, he supinely went along with the Administration’s fiscal policy and he certainly didn’t object to the instructions he was given.”

In private, at least, Volcker did voice his alarm to the politicians. “As the tax bill became more and more distorted, we got more and more concerned,” Schultz said. The vice chairman lobbied House members and Volcker worked the Senate side. They were careful to state that they were not declaring against the Reagan program, but they wished to warn Congress of the likely consequences—higher interest rates.

The message, Schultz said, went like this: “We are in favor of a tax cut, but you must recognize that if you can’t accomplish this with much bigger budget cuts than you are contemplating, it’s going to put much more pressure on us and that means higher interest rates.” The Federal Reserve’s own computer model of the economy had run a test and estimated that the likely effect of the Reagan tax cuts would be to raise real interest rates anywhere from 100 to 250 basis points (the estimate proved roughly accurate).

A lot of people had a tendency to disbelieve us and hope for the best, many Republicans in particular [Schultz said]. They told us, “Well, the old approach didn’t work. Let’s give this a try.” Later on, as it got closer to the vote, they said to us, “Well, we can’t do anything about it. We want to vote for tax cuts and we can’t get the spending cuts up, so we’re going ahead with the package as it is.” The political pressure was so strong, they were just willing to engage in wishful thinking.

At the White House and Treasury, the Reagan advisers were particularly rankled when they discovered that the Fed chairman was on Capitol Hill, saying ominous things about the President’s tax bill. Manuel H. Johnson, a supply-side economist and Treasury deputy (who himself would be appointed to the Federal Reserve Board five years later), complained that Volcker and the Fed were misreading the economic impact of the tax cuts. “The Fed argued [with the White House] all summer long about the tax bill being highly inflationary,” Johnson said. “They were going to have to lean against this tax policy all the more. We got quite frustrated with them. ‘Look,’ we said, ‘this is a phased-in fiscal policy. The tax cuts go into effect over three years.’”

Johnson and other supply siders thought the Fed’s misjudgment of the tax cuts led directly to an overly zealous money policy—and higher interest rates than were necessary. “I don’t think this was a planned recession by any means,” Johnson said. “The Fed was probably as surprised as anyone. They sincerely believed that we did have an excessive, inflationary fiscal policy—and they were going to have to resist it.”35

The supply siders’ criticism was supported by the Fed’s record of miscalculations and also in the comments from governors who acknowledged they were “leaning harder” against the economy in order to offset the supposed inflationary effects of the tax bill. Of course, the supply siders in the Reagan Administration tended to overlook the fact that it was their own colleagues, the monetarists, and their own President who had leaned on the Fed and demanded a tighter money policy. Still, they had a valid point about the inflationary impact of the tax cuts. Alan Blinder, a Keynesian economist at Princeton University and unsympathetic with the supply siders’ economic theory, nevertheless agreed with their complaint.

“The Fed panicked about the supply-side tax cuts,” Blinder explained. “The tax cuts weren’t really coming in fully until 1983, but the Fed overreacted to them. The tax bill had no effect on the economy immediately, but the Fed was worried about the inflationary effects and it beat them to the punch—they dampened down the economy and caused a recession.”36

As Schultz and Volcker lobbied Congress, they encountered complaints in the weekly meetings with Reagan economists, who accused them of trying to undermine the President. “I said, no, that’s not true in any way,” Schultz related. “We’re not speaking against the tax cuts. We favor tax cuts for investment. We are arguing for greater budget cuts.”

Shortly before the final vote in the House, Schultz had breakfast with the “boll weevils,” the thirty or so southern Democrats whom the White House was counting on as the swing votes that would give the Republicans a majority on the tax bill in the Democratic-controlled House. Schultz told them: “You should know, if you vote for this bill, it is going to result in higher interest rates.” His warning was not persuasive. “I only changed one vote,” Schultz said. “The rest were all committed.”

On July 27, the eve of the legislative showdown in the House, Ronald Reagan addressed the nation via television. “For nineteen out of the last twenty years, the federal government has spent more than it took in,” the President said. “There will be another large deficit in this present year . . . but with out program in place, it won’t be quite as big as it might have been. And starting next year, the deficits will get smaller until in just a few years the budget can be balanced.” The President’s senior advisers knew this was untrue.

The President was also upbeat about economic developments. “Businessmen and investors are making decisions with regard to industrial development, modernization and expansion—all of this based on anticipation of our program being adopted and put into operation,” Reagan reported. White House economists knew that this also was untrue.

The President urged citizens to wire and phone their elected representatives in behalf of the Administration’s tax bill, and a vast outpouring of popular support followed in subsequent days. Despite the months of partisan infighting, Congress did not need to be bludgeoned into voting for the across-the-board tax reduction. The House, where Republicans and Democrats fought for control, passed the Administration bill, 238 to 195, but even the rejected Democratic alternative was itself a statement that President Reagan’s tax-cutting, anti-government politics had triumphed. In the Senate, only eleven of the one hundred senators voted no.

The tax measure, aside from the deficits and other economic consequences, represented a profound change in political values. For the first time in many decades, Congress embraced an income-tax measure that was frankly regressive. Andrew Mellon’s economic vision was triumphant again. The largest benefits in reduced tax burden would go to the wealthiest taxpayers, and the tax relief became proportionately smaller and smaller for families that were less well off. The poorest families in America, when Social Security taxes and the effects of Reagan budget cuts were considered, actually lost money.

Tax breaks for businesses were so generous that scores of major corporations would enjoy “negative tax rates” on their profits in the years ahead—the federal government literally owed them money. The effective tax rate for financial institutions, for instance, would drop from 5.8 percent in 1980, already one of the lowest rates for American industries, to —3.8 percent in 1982. Famous corporate names like General Electric were effectively relieved of taxation.37

As manager for the national economy, the government in the summer of 1981 provided a literal fulfillment of Wright Patman’s old metaphor—the car with two drivers at the wheel. One was stepping on the gas and the other was stepping hard on the brakes. And the car, so to speak, was in the ditch.

The 1981 tax legislation proved to be regressive in a more fundamental way, hardly noted at the time. It became the pretext for a vast redistribution of incomes, flowing upward on the income ladder, through another powerful channel—interest rates. The price of money determined how the fruits of capitalist enterprise would be apportioned—the division of shares between creditors and debtors, between investors and entrepreneurs, between the old and the young, between workers and owners, The immediate consequence of the 1981 tax bill, virtually from the moment it was enacted, was higher interest rates. Paul Volcker’s warnings proved correct. The division of wealth was tilted toward the top—a larger share would flow to those who already had accumulated wealth. There would be less for everyone else.

In July, the Federal Reserve, anticipating passage of the tax bill, decided not to ease, even though most committee members now understood that the economy was on the brink of recession. Interest rates should have been falling since business activity was slackening. Instead, the Federal Open Market Committee let the Federal Funds rate move a full point higher, adding more tension to the banking system, more pressure on the economy. The prime rate charged by commercial banks responded by rising to 20.5 percent.

The bond market tightened too. Long-term interest rates moved up as much as 200 basis points in two months’ time as the tax bill was passed by Congress and signed by the President. Long rates should also have been declining as the economy’s demand for investment funds subsided. Instead, investors were demanding extra protection against the future.

But what caused interest rates to go still higher? Both the Federal Reserve and the bond market blamed the surge on the Reagan Administration—the tax cuts and the prospect of huge deficits—and their argument was widely accepted as the standard explanation, regularly invoked in the political debates of subsequent years. As a matter of logic, however, the tax legislation could not itself have been the cause. Larger federal deficits, after all, did not appear instantly in midsummer of 1981 with enactment of the tax bill. The deficits emerged gradually over several years. Thus, there was no supply-and-demand squeeze on credit markets in July 1981 that could have pushed the interest rates upward. On the contrary, the demand for credit was actually slackening as the economy sank into recession.

The direct cause of the higher rates was the bond market and the Federal Reserve, reacting together. Both feared the same thing—the inflationary potential of the deficits—and both moved protectively, ahead of the fact. The Fed moved short-term rates higher, expressing the same anxiety as the bond market.

When a senator asked Volcker about the Fed’s role, the chairman was typically opaque. “I certainly do not think in any fundamental sense that our policies are producing high interest rates,” he said. “What’s producing high interest rates is the situation we face, which is an inherited, deeply imbedded inflation, heavy credit demands, a pattern of high deficits.”38

This became the standard line of evasion. The Fed itself had not initiated anything. It was merely reacting to conditions as it found them. And one of the principal conditions was the fragile psychology of the bond market—where investors were alarmed by the prospects of future inflation fueled by the Reagan deficits. The only way to assuage these fears ultimately was to eliminate the deficits. In the meantime, the Federal Reserve would demonstrate its own resolve by rigorously controlling money—keeping interest rates high.

And were these fears of inflation justified? The Fed’s theoretical arguments were never confirmed by real events. The inflation rate was already moving lower and would continue to decline, notwithstanding larger and larger federal deficits. The Fed and financial markets, meanwhile, took real interest rates the other way. Perhaps someday the investors might be proved right about their fear of future inflation; one could hardly prove they were wrong. In the meantime, they would be well compensated for their anxieties—collecting a larger and larger real return on their capital.

For Wall Street, the reaction to the tax cuts was enormously hypocritical. Aside from sober investment bankers like Henry Kaufman, who had warned against the tax cuts, wealthy investors and major financial institutions were among the most ardent supporters (and beneficiaries) of the supply-side tax reductions. Yet they were the first to react negatively, once the President’s legislation had triumphed.

Paul A. Samuelson, an elder eminence among Keynesian economists, observed caustically: “Wall Street, in early 1981, panted for the tax cuts simply for their favorable income effects. . . . Once Wall Street got its heart’s desire, it quickly worked out the consequences. . . . So, immediately in mid-1981, Wall Street did what came naturally. It dumped its bonds, bidding up interest rates in the process. . . . y

For the next five years, the anxieties presumed by the financial markets—and by the Federal Reserve—produced an additional toll on American economic life, one that would collect hundreds of billions of dollars in added interest costs. People and enterprises were compelled to pay an “inflation premium” to creditors—even though inflation was falling—in order to borrow their money. Between Congress and the President and the Federal Reserve, the federal government had made possible an income-transfer program of vast dimensions, only it did not appear on the books anywhere as a federal program.

The inexorable shift of wealth shares was reflected most precisely in what happened to the real price of money—the real interest rate, determined when the nominal interest rates were discounted for inflation. If the nominal interest rate was 10 percent and the rate of inflation was 6 percent, then the real price of money would be 4 percent. Years of inflation had benefited the debtor classes and businesses with cheap credit in real terms; now the advantage was shifted sharply to the creditors. When a family bought a home and took on a mortgage, they typically looked at the nominal interest rate. Wise lenders looked, instead, at the real rate of interest.

In normal times, for instance, the rule of thumb among commercial bankers was that the spread between their prime rate for loans and the inflation rate should be 3 to 4 percent. Early in 1980, when the Fed first pushed up interest rates, the bankers’ real-interest spread grew above 4 percent. By early 1981, the real interest rate on bank loans climbed above 8 percent. By the summer of 1981, it was briefly above 9 percent.40

The real return on long-term credit was likewise pushed up dramatically. A Federal Reserve staff economist calculated that the real interest rate on twenty-year government bonds averaged only .6 percent when inflation was soaring in 1979—well below the historic norm for a fair return, around 2 percent or less. In the summer of 1981, the real rate on long bonds jumped from 2.9 to 5.1 percent—roughly double the historic return.41

The explanation was not complicated. Inflation was abating—while the nominal interest rates were increasing. When a family or small-business man borrowed at 11 or 12 percent in the late 1970s, it sounded expensive but was actually a good deal. The 11 percent money was cheap because inflation was running at 8 or 9 percent or even higher. In the 1980s, the real cost of the same transaction became steadily more and more expensive.

In broad terms, this represented an ever-expanding share for those with money to lend and invest and the transfer of real wealth from anyone who borrowed. One did not have to be rich to benefit. Elderly widows with savings would enjoy the rising real return on their bank CDs too. But millionaires and giant financial institutions would profit most substantially. The financial sector would flourish and the productive economy would pay a heavier price in order to function. Young families, just starting out in life, would confront higher hurdles than anything their parents had faced. By the summer of 1981, the real price of money was higher than it had been in fifty years and it would go still higher.

Whether people profited or lost from these new terms depended, in large measure, on where they stood in the spectrum of economic interests, less on their personal skills or energy. A farmer, after all, could not simply stop being a farmer and decide to be a bond investor. A home builder or an auto worker could hardly quit and go into banking. Many of them would be ruined, and after the fact, their failure would be blamed on their own miscalculations. American finance, meanwhile, would enter its most profitable cycle of the century.





