12 THAT OLD-TIME RELIGION


The furniture industry is dead,” Elizabeth Brock declared. “That means my sawmill is dead.” Brock operated a lumber company in north Georgia, International Hardwoods. The gathering recession had reduced her work force by 60 percent. “I have a small pallet plant that we take the low-grade lumber that the furniture factories cannot buy and we make hardwood pallets for the manufacturing and warehousing industries,” she explained. “Wooden pallets are a capital investment for most warehousemen. They cannot afford to make any capital investments right now.”

Brock described the poignant reality facing her employees and herself:

Yesterday was a cold day in the mountains of north Georgia. I had men standing around a barrel fire begging me to put them to work. I have no work for them. I cannot buy logs to cut lumber because I cannot sell the lumber. My loggers are standing there in their underwear and mackinaws freezing to death saying, “Find us some trees to cut.”

I cannot find money to buy logs to set the lumber on my yard. I do not have that kind of money. I cannot borrow it because the money is too expensive. If I could, who is going to loan the woman money to set the lumber on a yard when God knows when she is going to sell it?

Like other small businesses, Brock’s company was now threatened with the possibility of failure, at which point its productive assets would typically be sold to a larger corporation. Companies that were strong enough to weather the depressed conditions would be in a position to buy up real estate or machinery from smaller, failed enterprises at bargain prices. Recession encouraged the consolidation of ownership.

In the sawmill business [Brock explained], it is a rough man’s world and 40 percent of my friends in the business have sold out to larger companies because they could not hang on any longer. Some of them have just shut their mills down, walked away, laid their people off and said to the bank, “There it is.” I hope I do not have to do that, but it is getting scary.

The bigger conglomerates are having a tough time too. They are shutting down some mills. But they can afford to right now, so far. The Georgia-Pacifics, International Paper, Weyerhaeusers are standing like vultures over us little people, waiting until we say we have had enough, swooping in, paying us twenty-five cents on the dollar for machinery that is terribly expensive. Then we are left there with a hard life that we have lived, trying to put these businesses together.1

The logic swept across America, like a deep and irresistible wave. The high price of credit, engineered by the government, drove away customers and also raised the cost of doing business. Retailers found themselves burdened with swollen inventories of goods they could not sell. Manufacturers, in turn, received dwindling orders for new production. At a certain point, they closed the shops and mills and mines and sent the workers home. As more and more workers were severed from their jobs and incomes, consumer demand naturally declined further, the backlog of unsold goods grew larger. Soon everything would be in surplus, particularly the workers themselves.

Eventually, the process would produce the intended results. Sooner or later, both labor and business would have to yield, however reluctantly, to the ancient law of the marketplace: when supply exceeds demand, prices fall. More precisely, neither workers nor business managements could continue raising the price of whatever they sold, whether the commodity was labor or oil or automobiles, in the face of burgeoning surpluses. There was nothing subtle or mysterious about this. The process did not depend on intangible psychology or arcane theories of money. If the Federal Reserve succeeded in breaking inflation, it would be accomplished by the brute mechanics of surplus and failure.

General Electric’s Appliance Park in Louisville, Kentucky, was considered a good bellwether for the entire economy. In six sprawling factory buildings, the mammoth manufacturing plant supplied the nation with GE washers and dryers, electric ranges, refrigerators, dishwashers and room air conditioners. All of these products were sensitive to the changing moods of the buying public, to housing starts and the formation of new households, and to consumer interest rates. Appliance Park employed fifteen thousand men and women, union machinists, metal fabricators, electricians and other workers who earned premier industrial wages. Some savvy economists made a practice of checking the production schedules for Appliance Park as a way to test their macroeconomic forecasts against everyday reality.

In August 1981, Appliance Park ordered its first layoffs, 850 workers. In November, another 1,150 would be sent home. During 1982, another 3,000 employees would lose their jobs. Through the course of the recession, each of the appliance divisions would be temporarily shut down at least once. All told, five thousand jobs were eliminated, one-third of the work force. Afterward, when Appliance Park eventually returned to its full capacity, none of these people would get their old jobs back. They were displaced by automation and other cost-cutting improvements. For General Electric, the lull of recession was an opportunity to become more efficient and profitable. For five thousand workers, it meant searching for other permanent employment.2

The linkage of retrenchment rippled through the economy in diverse and circular ways, as Eldon Kirsch, an official of the United Steelworkers, understood. Kirsch’s district represented iron-ore miners on the Mesabi Range of northern Minnesota, where the taconite mines laid off three thousand, but it also included fabricating plants in Duluth and St. Joseph, where employment was reduced to skeletal maintenance crews.

When we talk about jobs, how we are going to get jobs in the taconite industry, the only way to get jobs is to produce taconite [Kirsch said]. To produce taconite, there has to be a need for steel. To have a need for steel, you have to have cars to buy and houses to build. The housing industry is down 40 to 50 percent. The car industry is down 40 to 50 percent. There is no demand for it. The reason there is no demand—put yourself as an employee in a fabricating plant, iron-ore mine, making from $20,000 to $30,000 a year. How could you afford to pay 20 percent interest?

I think it was twice that other car companies came out here a while back at 13.8 percent. How can you afford to pay that? Can you afford to pay $800 a month for a car payment or $600 for a car payment?3

In a sense, the iron miners lost their jobs because, first, the government raised the price of cars. When working people like themselves could no longer afford to buy cars, the miners were put out of work.

Many of them understood what was happening intuitively, without the need for sophisticated economic analysis. The favorable balance had shifted from production to finance, from labor to capital, and they could see this clearly enough in their own lives.

Robert Williams, a laid-off miner from Nassau, Minnesota, testified:

I am so scared now as far as what is going to happen. If I buy something on loan, how will I pay for it if I don’t have a job tomorrow? I am living in constant fear of tomorrow. I am hoarding my money. Say I am lucky and I have $10,000 in a T-bill. Will I buy a new car or secondhand car? If I can get 18 percent interest on a “money market” on my $10,000, that would be an annual raise of $2,400 a year. So I would be a fool to buy a new car. I will put my money in the bank and let it sit. The guy with the money has it made. The little guy will take his knocks from now until who knows when.4

Personal fear was a necessary element of the process too. Unemployment was rising. Home building was approaching a fifteen-year low. The more anxious people became about their future incomes, the less likely they were to borrow and buy. Their insecurities would moderate the demands of their union contract negotiators and contribute directly to braking the escalation of wages and prices.

I have been out of work since May [said Arthur Estrella, a fifty-five-year-old steelworker at Washburn Wire in Providence, Rhode Island]. My benefits are very small. I get unemployment right now. I was getting $130, then I got $143. I have a mortgage to pay—$166.42. I have fuel bills now I can’t pay. In fact, I had no food last week in the house. I had to pay my mortgage of $166. You can tell me how you can pay it out of $143. That is pretty rough. I have put applications into plants which, after I put them in, they laid off several people. There is no jobs around. The economy is very, very poor.

Arthur Estrella’s co-worker at Washburn Wire, James McCafferty, also lost his job after thirty years at the plant, but he counted himself lucky. “I was fortunate,” he said. “Through a friend of mine, I was able to get employed as a security guard. But that is about half of what I would normally be making.”5

Rhode Island, like other states, experienced a rising tide of bankruptcy. In 1979, 226,000 families had filed and in 1980 the number jumped to 360,000. By 1981, personal bankruptcies reached 519,000 in the state. Rhode Island’s business bankruptcies increased from 29,500 to 66,000. Bankruptcy was the forced liquidation of credit, a legal declaration that the borrower could no longer sustain his obligations and the creditors would have to settle for less and extinguish the debt.

A bankruptcy lawyer from Tucson, Arizona, Lowell Rothschild, described what he called the “domino effect” of failure:

If you have high interest and people do not buy houses, the builders don’t build them. If they don’t build them, the subs cannot work on them. If the subs cannot work on them, the carpenters, the masons, the plumbers have no work and they cannot pay their consumer debt. And that is the domino effect. You don’t have to be an economist. It is a very simple process. There are no jobs.

In Clarkston, Washington, Durward DeChenne was sixty-five years old and preparing to retire when the high interest rates hit—driving customers away from his marine-equipment store, raising the carrying costs of the boats and snowmobiles on his display floor. “I thought it was a short-term deal, that we might be able to carry it over,” DeChenne said. He was paying 24 percent interest on his inventory. His sales fell from $2 million a year to $600,000. DeChenne worked a year without pay, trying to save his business, then he closed the doors.

“We lost half of what we ever had, of everything we made in twenty-one years,” he said. “We just had to close it up and take our lumps.”

Like many victims, DeChenne did not blame Washington, neither President Reagan nor the Federal Reserve. “The President is on the right track, even though he put me out of work,” he said. “He had to put somebody out of work and somebody out of business.”6

But, in Mount Ayr, Iowa, a salesman named Jim Clark thought the government should have applied the pressure more gradually—or at least told people what was coming. When Clark bought the local Allis-Chalmers dealership in April 1981, he had no way of knowing that it was absolutely the worst moment to realize his dream of owning his own business. The local bank that financed the purchase and the Small Business Administration that guaranteed the loan did not seem to know it either. When the recession finally ended, Jim Clark’s store would be padlocked and he would be $225,000 in debt, working as a laborer at F & S Feed Grain.

“The government is at fault,” Clark said. “When they decided to stop inflation, it needed to be slowed down. But they should have used the brakes instead of the wall.”7

Some Americans reacted to their distress with a jaunty good humor. Dan Issa, a city councilman from Central Falls, Rhode Island, was among 150 people who lost their jobs at the Corning Glass plant. Issa joked about a cartoon he had seen in the newspaper. “I may not be an economist,” the man said, “but I know when I am broke.”

And many ordinary citizens felt frustration and confusion and anger. All of these emotions boiled up in Manny Dembs, a home builder from Detroit, Michigan, when he appeared before the Senate Banking Committee in Washington. Dembs was testifying with a panel of fellow builders, but when his turn came to speak, he was choking with outrage. His rambling outburst was a coarse soliloquy on the impotence of citizens like himself.

Excuse me, but I am angry and I’m hot [Manny Dembs told the senators]. Let me go into something here that bothers the heck out of me—on October the sixth, 1979. two years ago, two years ago, when the policy of the Federal Reserve Board decided to change the rules, instead of going on interest, they went on reserve requirements, et cetera. At that point, they made a decision and for two years we have been up and down, prime up, prime down. When I buy land, I buy a land contract and I can’t buy every day changing my mind. ... I kept reading The Wall Street Journal every hour, every second, every minute, to see M-l and M-2. I didn’t know what the hell M-l and M-2 meant. . . .

I am telling you. it cost me $20,000 in interest on overhead on fifty-two houses, $1 million in thirty years. I am going out of business. Thirty years, with my wife and three kids, and I got to worry about what the Reserve Board is going to do. I want the Reserve Board to retire themselves, the overall Reserve Board. We got the executive, we got the judicial, but we don’t have the Federal Reserve Board as a form of government. They’re economists, but they’re running our country.

We have got to do something to change it. What I would like to ask you, do something to change it. What I want you to do, I think all the Republicans, all the Democrats in Congress, stop playing politics with my life. I say: “Mr. Volcker, you are chairman of the board. Resign, resign! I don’t care if you are right or wrong. You are in charge, get out!”

I’m not a politician. I am just a builder, ready on the line, trying to make a buck. I don't know these people, the Milton Friedmans, Beryl Sprinkel, the Volckers. I’m reading about all these people. These people scare me. Lam worried about my country. I am worried that I am going to go down the drain. . . .

The bankers, who are these bankers? They’re running our country. I don't know why. But it isn’t a person. I am Manny Dembs and I compete with Wall Street. I'm not dumb. I’m not powerful enough. I'm a single citizen. I vote and I come to Washington. I talk to you people. I talk to bankers ... I respect you people in Congress, but what you should do, stand up. ah of you. Federal Reserve Board, don’t run my country. Don’t run me.

Manny Dembs paused, out of breath, exhausted by his anger and in tears. “I could go on and on,” he said, “but I want to give somebody else a chance.” The senators expressed sympathy and thanked him for his testimony.8

One commodity remained in scarce supply—bank credit. While other producers struggled with their unsold surpluses, the purveyors of credit continued to enjoy a sellers’ market. Incomes and profits shrank in virtually all other economic sectors, but commercial banks prospered from the general distress. Recession, perverse as it seemed, actually increased the profits of banking.

Like other aspects of the contraction, this phenomenon was almost never discussed by government economists, but it was still visible to ordinary citizens who could figure out the reality for themselves. Martin Bacal, for instance, president of a family business, the Pioneer Paint & Varnish Company in Tucson, Arizona, was taken aback by a newspaper article reporting that the profits of Tucson banks were going up as the recession took hold.

And they were up very substantially [Bacal said]. Very substantial. I begin to wonder. I talk to my own banker and have been told, “Yes, the bank is doing very well.” Yet the rest of us are not. It kind of makes sense. We are paying 20 percent, 24 percent, and can only earn 7 or 8 percent. We cannot be doing very well. But they are. And I have never understood. The Federal Reserve seems to be banker-oriented. And I wonder if ever we are going to see, as long as that board has the autonomy to determine interest rates and in effect economic policy, if we are ever going to see a return to lower rates.9

What was true in Tucson was true everywhere in America. Starting in 1979, when the Fed first pushed up interest rates, commercial banking entered its most profitable era since World War II. Banking’s net operating income increased 10.3 percent in 1980, despite the brief recession, and grew by another 9 percent in 1981, while the economy as a whole contracted. The basic measure of bank profitability—the return on equity—reached a historic peak, far above banking’s best years in the previous three decades. The largest gains in profit were made by the largest banks.

This striking change in the fortunes of bankers was reflected in the Federal Reserve’s reporting on bank holding companies. For the previous decade, the banks’ return on equity had averaged slightly more than 11 percent. In 1979, it jumped to a new record of 13.9 percent. The profit rate for banks remained nearly that high through the next three years while the economy at large struggled with failure and retrenchment.

Stated another way, bank profits increased by more than 25 percent while the returns on other kinds of enterprise were headed in the opposite direction. Professor Gerald Epstein, an economist at the New School for Social Research, worked out this comparison: the before tax profits of the corporate sector, excluding finance, declined to an average of 10.7 percent for the recession-plagued years of 1979 to 1982, compared to the long-term average of 15.9 percent profits for the years 1960 to 1978. Commercial banks, during the same four years, increased their average return on equity to 13.2 percent, up from the long-term average of 10.4 percent.10

The mechanics of recession virtually guaranteed this outcome, especially for larger banks that depended on the managed-liabilities strategy, borrowing funds in the money market in order to lend them out again to bank customers. On the upside, as interest rates were rising, banks could increase their interest-rate spreads. But the real profits came on the downside—when the economy was declining and interest rates were subsiding. At that point, the banks would still be collecting payments on old loans made when interest rates were at their peak, but they would be raising funds in the money market at the lower interest rates now available as demand slackened. Their incomes remained high while their operating costs declined—a widening spread that translated into greater profits.

Efficient bankers naturally tried to maintain the mismatch as long as they could. Typically, they decreased their loan rates as the economy went into recession—but more slowly than the decline of money-market rates on which banks themselves borrowed. In short, as the recession unfolded and gathered force, banks lent expensive money and funded the loans with cheaper money.

Paul Volcker’s initiative against inflation, whatever other long-term benefits it promised for the general economy, was, first of all, good for the banks, the Federal Reserve’s primary constituency. This was not peculiar to Volcker’s regime—recessions always improved bank earnings, at least for a time. Similar though milder increases in bank profits had accompanied previous contractions when the Fed pushed up interest rates and induced recession. Volcker’s offensive against inflation was more aggressive than any in the past, pushing interest rates to historic levels, and so his era produced a profit surge for banking that was more extreme too.

Eventually, if the recession continued long enough and the business failures spread too widely, the banks would also suffer. When their loan customers were forced to the wall and could no longer pay their debts, the bankers would be forced to write off more and more loans at a loss, losses subtracted from the profitable aspects of recession. For a time, however, the recession strengthened banking.

This economic reality—banks profit in recessions—cast a somewhat different light on the confidential advice that the Federal Reserve received regularly from the bankers. The twelve commercial bankers of the Federal Advisory Council, who met privately with the Federal Reserve Board four times a year, were not exactly disinterested consultants, devoted solely to the goal of “sound economics.” When these bankers urged the Fed to tighten its money control, to tolerate high rates and recession, and, above all, to ignore the inevitable “political” complaints from other interests, they were in fact arguing for the policy that would enhance their own profits. For two years, without surcease, the Federal Advisory Council had been imploring, warning, scolding Volcker and his colleagues. The tough monetary policy the bankers had advocated was now in place and, as a businessman might say, it went straight to the banks’ bottom line.

As the recession got under way in the third quarter of 1981, the Fed asked its advisory council of bankers to evaluate “the present condition of financial institutions under the stresses they are encountering.” In response, the Federal Advisory Council did not mention the “stress” of record-high profits, but the bankers modestly allowed that banks seemed to be holding up all right. “Although earnings are lower than desirable,” they reported, “large banks generally have been able to cope with uncomfortably high interest rates.”

According to the Fed’s own statistics, the larger banks “coped” with high interest rates in 1981 by producing a return on their equity of 13.66 percent—a banner year, despite the stresses and strains, far better than anything the major banks had enjoyed in the 1950s, 1960s or 1970s.

Their customers were not doing so well, the bankers added. Neither were their competitors, the savings and loan industry. The S & L’s were saddled with portfolios of long-term home mortgages, issued years before at lower interest rates, and so the interest-rate peak damaged them severely. The thrifts were suffering operating losses of growing proportions, their capital positions were weakening.

As for business, generally, the Federal Advisory Council took note of the developing distress: “Overall, high interest rates have created additional financial strains on bank customers, including a significant increase in bankruptcies. Existing loan portfolios show some quality deterioration and this has persuaded banks to adopt more cautious lending policies.”11

When Vice President George Bush returned home from an overseas trip in midsummer, 1981, he expressed his puzzlement. In Paris, Bush had met with the French government’s senior economic officials and they had complained about “the high U.S. interest-rate policy,” Bush told a Cabinet Council meeting at the White House. They had used the phrase, he said, “as if U.S. policy was aimed at trying to raise and keep interest rates high.” The socialists in Paris appeared to have a clearer grasp of what was happening to global capitalism than did the conservative Republican.12

The mechanics of money pay no respect to national boundaries, and the Federal Reserve’s high interest rates were forcing great shifts in commerce and finance upon the entire world. The global economy was sinking into recession too, large nations and small ones alike. When the richest market in the world, the American economy, declined, exporters around the world lost their best customer. Moreover, the central banks of other industrial nations raised their interest rates too, supporting Volcker’s initiative against inflation and depressing their own domestic economies. When the locomotive pulled the world’s economy forcefully in one direction, the rest of the train followed.

France, with its new socialist government, tried for a time to go the other way. Frangois Mitterrand attempted to stimulate his domestic economy as the U.S. and others were dampening theirs and discovered painfully that it couldn’t be done. Capital fled from French enterprises in search of the higher returns available overseas; the French franc was depreciated rapidly. Instead of faster growth and full employment, the Mitterrand government got stagnation and inflation.

The ascendant U.S. dollar was now the symbol of restored American hegemony. Once derided by the Europeans as weak and unreliable, the dollar was becoming harder and harder, as U.S. inflation moderated. The higher interest rates available in the U.S. attracted more and more foreign wealth to dollar-denominated financial assets (including foreign wealth held as overseas capital by America’s own multinational corporations). The worldwide demand for dollars was increasing, but the supply of dollars was still held tight by the Fed, so naturally the international price for dollars went up—the foreign-exchange rate at which other currencies were converted into U.S. dollars. An international bank or a corporation or private investor who wished to buy dollar assets would have to pay with more francs or pounds or Deutsche marks.

From July 1980 to September 1981, the dollar appreciated by 36 percent in its international-exchange value with the German mark. It appreciated by 5 percent against the yen, 26 percent against the Swiss franc, 34 percent against the British pound.13 Now the allied governments were complaining that the dollar was being driven too high on foreign-exchange markets and they urged the United States to moderate its policy.

The hapless bystanders in the process were the less-developed nations of the Third World, whose economies still depended largely on primitive capitalism, selling their raw commodities, from coffee and sugar to copper and rubber, to the industrialized nations. What was to become a severe recession for Americans would be catastrophe for the citizens of these poorer countries in Africa and Latin America and Asia. Their economic output and real incomes fell disastrously, as much as 10 percent in some instances, as their export markets dried up and commodity prices began to fall sharply. These producers were stuck with surplus too.

Falling copper prices helped reduce the cost to American manufacturers and consumers; it meant crippling losses for Chile or Zaire. Unlike the diverse American economy, the underdeveloped nations could not simply shut down the factory and wait for the recession to be over. Mining raw materials and the production of agricultural commodities were, in many cases, the core of their economies and the major employers. Closing the copper mines was an invitation to social rebellion. Instead, they kept mines operating and sold their production at a loss.

Simultaneously, the debt burdens of the less-developed countries— the LDCs in common parlance—expanded dangerously. The worldwide spike in interest rates had raised the cost of the debt, the hundreds of billions in outstanding loans from the banks of Europe and America. Both governments and businesses in the struggling nations were compelled to borrow more and more, simply to keep up the payments on their old loans—at the very time their economies were contracting dramatically.

But the stronger dollar also came home to the United States. It was another channel through which the Fed’s monetary policy depressed the American economy. Just as high interest rates drove away the domestic customers for goods and services, the stronger dollar drove away foreign buyers of American products. It made U.S. exports proportionately more expensive for overseas customers, and at the same time, the appreciating dollar made foreign imports cheaper in the American marketplace. The grain from Iowa or Kansas now cost much more in France. The machine tools made in Germany could underprice American competitors from Cincinnati and take away customers in their own domestic market.

By the autumn of 1981, the damage was already considerable and obvious. American farmers saw their grain exports declining—a crucial outlet for the abundant overproduction of U.S. agriculture. U.S. manufacturing, meanwhile, was losing both exports and domestic market shares. Through the 1970s, the constant complaints about the weak dollar had overlooked the fact that the currency imbalance permitted an export boom for America’s mercantile interests. Strong trade had meant higher employment and an expanding productive base. The trade-off was inflation. Now, in the interest of halting price inflation, the boom was over.

The Federal Reserve governors were concerned enough to ask the Federal Advisory Council for an assessment of the dollar’s impact on trade. At its September meeting, the bankers’ council provided a grim summary: an expected decline of 1.3 percent in U.S. exports this year and another $25 billion loss next year.

New England’s high-technology merchandise has experienced sluggish export activity [the council reported]. Textile manufacturing representatives report a 35 percent rise in American textile prices, coupled with 5 percent decline in domestic output. A major Midwest chemical and textile manufacturer is struggling with a significant 15 percent falloff in overseas shipments.

The nation’s steel industry has been especially hard hit; imports now represent 17.5 percent of the American steel market, resulting in price restraints on domestic products and a depression in the export market. U.S. agricultural exports, both food and fiber, are slowing. The expected value of those exports will be several billion dollars below forecasts made by the U.S. Department of Agriculture just four months ago. These downward adjustments have been linked directly to the stronger international value of the dollar.

But what damaged American production was rewarding for American finance, especially for the major banks active in international markets. The rising dollar meant simply that the value of their overseas dollars was rising too. It also meant that market demand was growing for the commodity that American financial institutions traded —U.S. financial assets. As long as the Fed held interest rates high— higher than competing returns in foreign countries—capital naturally flowed across boundaries, seeking the higher returns available in American financial instruments. And, as the demand for dollars increased, the dollar would naturally get harder and harder in foreign exchange. In other words, the stronger dollar was good for business— if your business was finance.

In political terms, the Reagan Administration had the power to intervene with the Fed, but did not use it. The dollar’s international value was one of the few areas of monetary policy where both law and tradition gave the executive branch higher authority than the Federal Reserve. The Treasury Secretary was responsible for U.S. dollar policy, and if he wished, he could advise the Fed to adjust its domestic interest rates accordingly.

Or Treasury could coordinate interventions in foreign-exchange markets—buying or selling dollars by both Treasury and the Fed—to push the price of the dollar up or bring it down. Given the fundamentals, interventions would not likely have changed the basic trend launched by the Fed, but the Reagan Administration didn’t believe in them anyway. It was committed to laissez-faire—let the markets decide what the dollar is worth and don’t interfere.

With this attitude, the Reagan Administration was, ironically, surrendering its one legitimate avenue for political leverage over the central bank. It was not clear that senior political advisers at the White House, none of whom was especially sophisticated about money politics, understood the implications. The men in charge at the Federal Reserve certainly did. As Anthony Solomon of the New York Fed explained:

If Treasury wants a monetary policy that strengthens the dollar or weakens it, we have to listen to that. But, when you have a Treasury that doesn’t care, then it cannot expect to tell us what domestic monetary policy should be. If you have a Treasury that doesn’t care about the dollar, you’ve removed the one legitimate channel of executive-branch influence over the Federal Open Market Committee.

Jude Wanniski was one of those rare characters who hung around the edges of political power and, without portfolio, bombarded the incumbents of government with his complaints and suggestions. In the 1970s, Wanniski’s articles in The Wall Street Journal and elsewhere had helped to create political acceptability for the idea of supply-side tax cuts. He was a relentless advocate for gold. He was a close adviser to Representative Jack Kemp and other conservative reformers. Now, with Ronald Reagan in power, Wanniski kibitzed his friends in the White House and at Treasury and even dined infrequently with the chairman of the Federal Reserve. No one could say whether Wanniski had any actual influence on government policy, but important people listened to him.

“I’ve sworn I’d never write to you unless the news was really bad. It’s now bad enough,” Jude Wanniski wrote to President Reagan in the fall of 1981. He enclosed a magazine article he had written on the economic disorders and urged the President to read it carefully because “it represents the viewpoint of the supply siders outside your Administration, a viewpoint you have not been getting inside. . . .

“We are on the verge of a global depression,” Wanniski warned, “but your economic advisers are blinded by the slide in interest rates into predicting prosperity just around the corner.”

He explained that the world economy “has been led into recession and the path of a gathering financial storm by obsolete U.S. monetary policy.” To avert disaster, the government must abandon the monetarist doctrine of Milton Friedman and swiftly adopt a new gold standard.

The President’s reply, a few weeks later, left Wanniski dejected.

Dear Jude,

Thanks very much for your letter and for the script of the Business Week article. I’ve read it and assure you it is being distributed “in house.”

I know there is great difference on this subject among top economists, even with one of my favorite people Milton F. opposed, but I’m looking hard at it. As you know, I have a task force studying gold, so will refrain from comment until they report in.

Please believe me, there is less disarray among our family here than the press would lead you to believe. I’m totally pledged to our economic program (the tax cuts), and no one is pushing the other way.14

Wanniski was crestfallen. Reagan’s letter was a polite brush-off. To Wanniski, the meaning was clear: Milton Friedman would remain the regnant intellectual guiding the President’s thinking, the monetarist approach at the Fed would continue with White House encouragement and the rigid control of the money supply would play out to inevitable consequences—a long and severe recession.

On October 18, for the first time, the President had personally announced the recession. Unemployment was ratcheting upward each month, above 8 percent and headed for double digits (in the 1980 campaign, Reagan had decried the “Carter depression” when unemployment was at 7.6 percent). Interest rates were subsiding at last and price inflation too, but the economic contraction was the visible event. Responding to reporters’ questions on the White House lawn, Reagan said, “I think there’s a slight recession and, I hope, a short recession. I think everyone agrees on that.”

The President’s rhetoric now shifted perceptibly. His predictions of an imminent surge in investment and growth disappeared, replaced by an emphasis on the sins of the past. Jimmy Carter was to blame. Carter had allowed the inflation and, therefore, Carter was responsible for the recession.15 Instead of robust claims, the President offered anecdotes of heroic sacrifice. A blind veteran of World War II had written in Braille, Reagan said, to volunteer a cut in his disabled veteran’s benefits if that would help the country get back on the right track.

We’re going through a period of difficult and painful readjustment [the President acknowledged in a television speech to the nation]. I know that we’re asking for sacrifices for virtually all of you, but there is no alternative. Some of those who oppose this plan have participated over the years in the extravagance that has brought us inflation, unemployment, high interest rates and an intolerable debt. ... I believe we’ve chosen a path that leads to an America at work, to fiscal sanity, to lower taxes and less inflation. . . ,16

The rhetoric of shared sacrifice and necessary pain, the price that must be paid for previous extravagance, was the moral center of what Ronald Reagan really believed about the gathering recession and the American economy. His optimistic rhetoric notwithstanding, the President could not have been surprised by the spreading economic distress that was closing businesses and putting people out of work. In a deeper sense, this was what he had always expected and, indeed, what he had long recommended. The optimism was genuine enough, but Ronald Reagan also believed in a sterner economic doctrine that politicians referred to as the “old-time religion.”

Before he became President, Reagan had articulated this viewpoint regularly in his syndicated radio talks and speeches. The nation, he would warn, faced a big “bellyache” of unemployment and recession as punishment for its inflationary excesses. In 1978, Reagan confided to a newspaper interviewer: “Pm afraid this country is just going to have to suffer two, three years of hard times to pay for the binge we’ve been on.”

As a presidential candidate, Reagan had been persuaded by advisers to drop the line about a national “bellyache.” The ominous talk would drive off potential voters; people did not want to elect a President who promised them two or three years of hard times. The “old-time religion” was derided by supply-side apostles like Kemp and Wanniski and economist Arthur Laffer, who complained that adherence to “root-canal economics” had defeated a generation of conservative Republican doomsayers.

The “bellyache” prescription disappeared from Reagan’s speeches, but not from his thinking. “Reagan learned from Carter,” one aide explained. “You don’t get any mileage out of telling people how hard it’s going to be.” But, in the Oval Office, as the recession gathered force, the President frequently expressed his conviction that the suffering was inevitable and necessary.17

The purgatory view of inflation was out of sight, but not out of mind [David Stockman said]. It was never articulated in public, but privately the President was tolerant of the circumstances. It fulfilled the old Ronald Reagan’s expectations of what would happen when you shifted from

Keynesian liberalism to a sound policy. The President would say to us: “We’ve been on a binge for thirty years. This is the price you have to pay.”

William Niskanen, a member of Reagan’s Council of Economic Advisers, said many others shared the faith: “There was a fairly widespread consensus within the Administration that we had to tolerate a mild recession to get inflation down. We were Calvinists in a way. The feeling was that good things don’t all come in a package, that you have to have a little pain.”

The metaphors these public men chose to describe their secular ideas—“old-time religion” and “purgatory” and “Calvinist”—revealed the religious content of their economics. Unlike the abstract language of economics, the religious phrases suggested the deeper emotional context of what was happening. Purgatory meant purposeful suffering to achieve redemption.

“Capitalist rationality does not do away with sub- or superrational impulses,” Joseph Schumpeter wrote. “It merely makes them get out of hand by removing the restraint of sacred or semisacred tradition.” Capitalism also adapted sacred tradition to its own uses, inventing a rationalistic logic that corresponded with the oldest rituals of worship and cloaked the nonrational impulses in scientific garb.

Every important economic theory, one could say, relied upon an unstated subtext drawn from religious convictions. To declare correct principles for the functioning of the economy, one would first have to make certain assumptions about the larger nature of life itself—about God’s purpose and humanity’s obligations and the moral law that derived from the relationship of deity and mortals. Monetarists, for instance, assumed an immutable natural order, knowable limits that worldly existence imposed on human behavior and predictable penalties for folly and error. The money rule was described as a golden mean: a society that faithfully adhered to it would enjoy the maximum of what was possible in life. If society strayed too far from its path, like Icarus daring to fly too close to the sun, disorder and retribution would result. The advocates of gold relied upon divine authority to enforce this natural order. If humankind pledged obedience to God’s indestructible metal, it would be rewarded with an eternal assurance of stability. Both doctrines, gold and monetarism, were expressions of premodernist fundamentalism, simple and certain moral formulas for life, and their certitudes had deep appeal, especially in anxious times.

In this context, Keynes and his followers were the heretics. They were secular humanists who claimed that men and women could responsibly manage human affairs for themselves. They were rationalists who dismissed the “old-time religion” and its false moral commandments. Universal human pleasure, Keynes announced, did not require a requisite measure of Calvinist pain. It required the application of human intelligence.

When Americans judged economic events or political agendas, they worked off the same subtext, the same set of religious assumptions. Like the President himself, citizens were capable of simultaneously embracing conflicting sensibilities, both the old-fashioned Protestant ethic and the humanist faith of abundance. They believed in the here and now—easy credit, full employment and the economic guarantees of the welfare state. But they also still believed, down deep, that sinful excess must be punished, that suffering was necessary for redemption. The recession fulfilled their expectation.

The “old-time religion” was unacceptable as an explicit theme in a political campaign, but it connected with deeply held beliefs—and a large reservoir of collective guilt. The disorders of inflation produced complicated anxieties that included a sense that, as Reagan put it, everyone must pay for the “binge.”

These underlying attitudes were suggested, at least obliquely, in the public-opinion polls on inflation. During the 1980 presidential election, when political candidates were accentuating the positive, the public expressed an overwhelming pessimism: the country would have to undergo a recession in order to slow down inflation. By a 2-to-l majority, people agreed with Ronald Reagan’s unexpressed conviction that the nation must endure a “bellyache” in order to cure itself. According to a Harris poll, 55 percent even said they would favor measures to bring on a recession if that would stop inflation.18

With a politician’s intuition, Ronald Reagan perhaps grasped that his Calvinist dogma was not altogether out of step with what the electorate really believed. A prudent candidate would not speak of these things directly, but people understood the moral commandment better than they acknowledged. In the spring of 1981, public opinion swung to a much more optimistic frame of mind, as the President campaigned for his economic agenda. The majority appeared to believe his promises of economic recovery. By the fall, however, most had returned to their original pessimism. They could see for themselves that the society was beginning to pay for its collective guilt' The suffering was what they had expected all along.

In the political economy, as in the church, ritual atonement required the elements of convincing theater. For the vast audience of faithful, an ancient religious drama was performed by two figures of mythic authority, the President and the Federal Reserve chairman, who presided like priest and prince on a stage of darkness and light. One was shadowy and remote, an ominous figure; the other, bright and cheerful. Paul Volcker was the stern father who admonished and prophesied, uttering mysterious incantations of numbers. Ronald Reagan was the generous king who inspired hope, whose rhetoric evoked streaks of sunshine across the darkened sky. Together, they promised redemption—if only the faithful flock would first accept the penitential sacrifice.

The ritual of atonement could even be satisfying. Most Americans, after all, would not suffer grievously from the economic contraction. They would witness the dislocations and failure around them, but they would not themselves have to endure the worst of it. Millions of wage earners would lose their livelihoods, but the majority would not. Tens of thousands of businesses would be driven to bankruptcy, but most would survive. For most Americans, the recession meant at most a postponement of their economic ambitions, a time to pull back and wait until the “bad times” passed. In exchange, they received an expunging of guilt.

The real burden of cleansing pain was borne disproportionately by a defenseless minority of Americans. The rest accepted this as morally wholesome or else pretended not to know. The political rhetoric of the leaders emphasized shared sacrifice, a period of national penance in which all participated, and this pretense enabled citizens to ignore the true moral content of the exercise. There was something bracing, spiritually invigorating, in the knowledge of “hard times,” especially if one averted one’s eyes and pretended that all were sharing in the sacrifice together. The social deception required a complicity of ignorance between citizens and their leaders.

The economic liquidation, in fact, resembled the form, though not the content, of a primitive religious practice—the pagan ritual of human sacrifice. Some individuals were chosen to serve as victims for the good of the entire society, sacrificed in order that the tribe would be restored to harmony with its gods. In moral terms, the process was sadistic, an example of what Thorstein Veblen called the enduring barbarism of modern society.

The economic victims were chosen at random, but mostly from among the weaker groups in the society. The methodology employed by the Federal Reserve to induce contraction—rationing credit by raising its price—insured that the strongest individuals and enterprises would be able to evade selection. There was this hierarchy within democracy—a hierarchy of vulnerability.

Many victims, ignorant of society’s larger purpose, innocently protested. Such was the power of economic faith that some victims accepted their fate and even endorsed it as necessary. The moral justification was expressed in Schumpeter’s ringing phrase, “creative destruction,” which suggested that, from time to time, capitalism must burn off its dead and obsolete parts in order to grow freely again. The implication was that only deserving victims would be destroyed, punished for their inefficiency. But this article of faith did not correspond to reality. It would be more precise to say that victims were punished for not being stronger or larger. For the most part, their inefficiency consisted of not having the accumulated financial resources to protect themselves.

The religious subtext of economic recession helped to explain why people put up with it. The public’s tolerance for the contraction and loss was conditioned by a deeper sense of religious awe. Moral objections and democratic qualms were stilled or at least moderated by primitive fears. The gods would be angry if the price was not paid. For a time at least, most Americans acquiesced, with pious sympathies, to the necessity that some among them must be punished. The authority to perform the sacrifice, whether people realized it or not, was implicit in the powers they had conferred, by democratic process, on their national government. The secular temple on Constitution Avenue fulfilled its sacred purpose.

Public acceptance of recession declined proportionately, however, as the ritual continued and the suffering spread. The longer it went on, the more distressing it became to people. Atonement was necessary, but perhaps the priests were going too far. The sacrifices began to seem greater than the burden of guilt required. As failure and unemployment spread through the society, it occurred to more and more citizens that they too might be chosen as victims.

The President’s senior advisers were confronted by guilt of a more personal nature—their own guilt over the massive federal deficits they had created. By October, when the recession was well recognized, the President’s chief of staff, James Baker, and his inner circle of legislative strategists were confronted with the reality of what their congressional victories had accomplished—budget imbalances on an unprecedented scale. In other circumstances, the White House might have turned its attention to the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy and pushed for a speedy recovery. But Baker and his colleagues were preoccupied with the mess they had created themselves—a fiscal deficit that would grow to $200 billion a year.

The deficits became so big, so fast, the numbers traumatized the politicians, both in the White House and the Congress [David Stockman said].

It made the politicians in the White House feel so guilty. Baker’s attitude was that deficits caused inflation and something had to be done about them first. The 1982 elections—my God, we’re going to get wiped out. We have to do something to get the economy off its knees.

The embarrassment became their ruling preoccupation, which effectively muted the political pressures on the Fed. “The White House went into sheer panic over the deficits,” a Treasury aide said, “and that panic drove economic policy. The Secretary of Treasury was frustrated about his inability to get anyone at the White House to focus on monetary policy.”

Stockman added: “The effect of the triple-digit deficits was that it really forestalled or dulled what might have been the usual attacks on the Fed. There was a sense of guilt among the politicians. Because they were out of line so far on fiscal policy, they couldn’t attack the Fed. It really produced a window of maneuverability for the Fed.”

A consensus was quickly developing among Republican leaders in Congress and the President’s senior advisers (though not including the President himself). One way or another, Congress would have to take back some of the generous tax cuts that it had enacted only a few months earlier. This question—how to reduce the massive deficits— became the absorbing issue for all of Washington.

Frederick Schultz, the Fed vice chairman, was at a Washington banquet when he fell into a dinner-table debate with Walter Wriston, CEO of Citibank. While Schultz and Wriston argued over the projected supply-side deficits, Senator Robert Dole, chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, sat at the same table and mostly listened.

I argued: you had to expect this [Schultz said]. It was clear that this was going to happen. If the Fed sticks to its guns, there was no way for interest rates to go but up. Wriston argued that it didn’t have to happen. Walt believed in the supply-side thesis. He said there would be more capital spending and this would bring in more revenue and there was no reason the deficits should affect interest rates.

A few days later, Senator Dole encountered Fred Schultz in an elevator and informed him: “You won the debate. I think we are going to have to do something on the fiscal side.”

Paul Volcker made the same plea in public. “We can’t shrink from considering new revenue sources,” he said. While the deficits temporarily cushioned the effects of the recession, they also heightened the long-term fears of financial markets. Short-term interest rates were declining, Volcker noted, but long-term rates remained “stubbornly high.” Credit markets, he said, were worried that once economic expansion started again, the federal government would soak up the available capital for its own borrowing.19

In economists’ circles, the collision was described respectfully as a “fiscal-monetary mismatch.” The government was pulling the economy in opposite directions, stimulating and suppressing simultaneously, and monetary policy had won—overpowering fiscal policy. The predicament, however, actually enhanced the Federal Reserve’s power. By enacting huge fiscal deficits, Congress and the President had effectively checkmated themselves. Practically speaking, they were confronted with only one option, the issue they would debate endlessly for the next five years—how to restore some balance to fiscal policy.

Given the box that elected politicians had put themselves in, they were impotent to control things. The Federal Reserve was the only lever of macroeconomic management that remained flexible and, henceforth, it would be the Fed that drove the car, virtually alone. While Congress wrangled over the deficits, the Federal Reserve would decide on its own whether and when the economy would be pushed forward or pulled back.

“You sit there and try to run the entire economy—that’s what we’re trying to do,” Vice Chairman Schultz brooded. “It is wrong for the Federal Reserve to try to run the economy, but that’s the position we were put in. It’s wrong, but there we are—struggling to be the economic czars for the entire country.”

The economic news was not all bad, however. The process of liquidation was beginning to show its effect on prices and the progress was substantial. For most of the previous two years, the monthly Consumer Price Index had hovered close to 10 percent or even higher. In October, it fell abruptly to just below 5 percent, seasonally adjusted. In November, the monthly CPI went back up to 6 percent, but subsided again the following month. The era of double-digit inflation was coming to an end.

No one was more pleased than the President. “Ronald Reagan’s selection process is that out of twelve items in the news, he will pick the two that are good,” Stockman said. “The inflation numbers were really starting to look good. Everyone in the White House was talking about that and bragging.”

As for the recession, Treasury Secretary Donald Regan predicted confidently that it would be over soon. In early November, Regan conceded that “this current quarter may be a real downer,” but the contraction would be less severe by the opening months of 1982 and the economy would resume real growth by the spring.20

His monetary adviser, Beryl Sprinkel, also took a sanguine view of the contraction. On November 12, Sprinkel reported to the Cabinet Council that everything seemed on course, as though he had been predicting recession from the start:

Recent developments confirm that the economy is in a recession. This is not surprising or alarming because a slowdown in economic activity is the expected, short-run effect of a deceleration of money growth. . . . The economy is likely to remain weak for several months, but this is not a sign that the program is “failing.” On the contrary, a temporary slowdown in economic activity is the predicted, immediate effect of the transition from excessive and inflationary money growth. . . .

It is important that concern about the recession not lead to quick-fix attempts to reverse the economic slowdown, such as a rapid reacceleration of money growth. . . . The restrictive effect on output and employment of the monetary slowdown is temporary and the economy should recover quickly.21

In political terms, everything seemed on course too. A recovery by early spring would be perfectly timed for the 1982 congressional elections in the fall.

“It was important to take your licks now,” Lawrence Kudlow of OMB explained. “The President wasn’t up for re-election for three more years. This was the time to take your pain and get it over with.”

The majority leader of the Senate normally operated with a calm, affable demeanor and so his remarks to the strategy conference of Republican congressional leaders sounded especially harsh.

“Volcker’s got his foot on our neck,” Senator Howard Baker of Tennessee complained. “And we’ve got to make him take it off.”

The other Republican leaders were upset too. Senator Baker assured the group that he intended to deal personally with the chairman of the Federal Reserve. Volcker would be told what Congress wanted, without a lot of obscure discussion about M-l and all that.

Members of Congress live according to their own electoral calendar. The President’s men might be unalarmed by the “temporary slowdown,” but some senators and all representatives faced re-election every two years and their patience with economic distress was understandably more limited. If the recession lasted through 1982, with no sign of relief, Republicans would lose congressional seats and possibly the majority control of the Senate that made Howard Baker floor leader.

Most congressional politicians in both parties did not pretend to a sophisticated knowledge of monetary policy, but they understood one big thing—interest rates. The high interest rates were suffocating their constituents, both businesses and consumers. As a practical guide, the legislators usually followed the prime rate charged by banks —and the prime remained desperately high. Until mid-October, banks kept their basic loan rate at 19 percent, even though other short-term rates had fallen substantially. With inflation falling but the prime rate staying high, the real return for bankers naturally increased. The banks, of course, held on to the wider spread and the larger profits as long as they could.

To Baker and other Republicans, this looked like gross ingratitude. They had just enacted generous tax cuts for business and finance; now Wall Street was repaying the favor with punishingly high interest rates and surging bank profits.

“It’s time indeed that the financial markets realize that they’re playing a dangerous game,” Baker complained publicly. He and Representative Robert H. Michel, the House Republican leader, announced, none too subtly, that if interest rates didn’t decline soon, Congress might be compelled to enact credit controls.

“The future of our program and our chances of getting control of the House are, right now, tied to interest rates,” Representative Guy Vander Jagt, chairman of the Republican Congressional Campaign Committee, conceded. “In sixty to ninety days,” Michel insisted, “something’s got to give.”22

The odd spectacle of Republican conservatives threatening Wall Street bankers with the sort of government intervention usually espoused by liberal Democrats was a measure of their alarm. But some Republicans were infected with a dash of the old Populist spleen traditionally associated with the Democratic Party. Republican attitudes toward Wall Street depended primarily on where the Republicans were from—from the Midwest farm states and the developing provinces of the South and West or from the financial citadels in the money-center cities. Howard Baker, for instance, appreciated the South’s lingering resentment. His threat to impose government controls on Wall Street may not have been genuine, but his irritation was.

They are interest-rate junkies [Baker complained]. They all love it, they love the widening spread between interest rates and inflation. I told a bunch of them that if interest rates didn’t come down, there was going to be bloody retribution, not from government, but from people. I got a lot of criticism for that. People told me it was market forces and nobody could interfere with that. I said, “Sure, yes, but the market likes high rates. The market’s keeping the price artificially high to increase profits.”

Senator Paul Laxalt of Nevada was an orthodox conservative in most respects, but he was also a westerner, and on the subject of interest rates, Laxalt sounded like an “easy money” man. As the Republicans’ anxieties increased, Senator Laxalt urged his good friend, the President, to sponsor an anti-usury bill—a measure that would impose a new cap on interest rates. Laxalt’s proposal was circulated in the White House, but sober conservative economists scotched it.

The two prominent Texans in the White House—Vice President George Bush and Chief of Staff James Baker—were themselves wealthy, urbane men, yet, in private councils, they too sometimes expressed mild echoes of the old regional resentment toward money-center banks, high interest rates and the Federal Reserve. The White House economists’ elaborate explanations of monetarist principles did not entirely satisfy them. At one point, the Vice President proposed that the Administration impose an excess-profits tax on banks if the prime rate did not come down. Nothing came of the suggestion.

While the White House policy makers remained relatively passive, Howard Baker followed through on his promise to confront Volcker. He invited the Federal Reserve chairman to his office for a heart-to-heart conversation on interest rates and monetary policy. It was the first of many intense meetings between the two men, and White House officials were told that the Senate majority leader “really put the wood to him,” as one of them said.

“It was me lecturing Volcker on how bad things were for us and how he had to get interest rates lower,” the senator said. “Volcker never said much at all. I knew the meeting was over when he stood up to leave.”

The Republican leader tried to impress upon the Fed chairman that the political situation would deteriorate if the Federal Reserve persisted. Sooner or later, a majority would form, among both Republicans and Democrats, that might enact punitive legislation—stripping the Fed of its independence and relaxing the central bank’s tight-money policy by congressional edict.

“I was genuinely frightened that I would lose control over the Senate if we didn’t get some movement on interest rates,” Baker said. “I fussed at Volcker regularly and warned him, but I never said it publicly. He began to understand that I meant what I said. I was going to beat hell out of him until he changed these policies, but I wasn’t his enemy. M

The Fed chairman, however, could make his own assessment of the political threat facing the central bank. Congressional temper was rising, as one would expect, but this did not necessarily mean that Congress would actually do anything to the Fed. As Volcker well appreciated, much of the political outcry over interest rates was merely showing the flag to appease angry constituents. A congressman would issue a blistering statement and the hometown press would report his attack on the Fed and the distressed home builders in his district would feel grateful. Nothing of political substance was involved.

The inhibitions against taking direct control over money policy were deep and historic. Congress could set interest rates and money growth if it wished, but then it would also be responsible for interest rates. Instead, the job was delegated to the Federal Reserve. As Nancy Teeters observed: “There is a widespread perception on the Hill that they don’t want to do it . . . and most members like it that way.”

Volcker also knew, from his own discreet lobbying on Capitol Hill, that many of the key legislative players were on his side. Senators like Jake Garn of Utah, the Republican chairman of the Senate Banking Committee, and the ranking Democrat, Proxmire of Wisconsin, supported what the Fed was doing, and, if it became necessary, they and many others would defend the Fed against legislative assaults. The Fed’s chairman personally worked hard at cultivating congressional friends, senators and representatives from the natural majority of moderates and conservatives who were always reluctant to tamper with the long-standing institutional arrangements. Volcker was more impressed by the reservoir of congressional support for the Fed’s tough policy than he was by the inevitable critics.

As Senator Baker’s frustrations increased, the Federal Reserve chairman was summoned regularly for consultations. The private dialogue continued month after month, without much change in its outline or intensity. So did the majority leader’s exasperation.

“One day,” Baker said, “when I hadn’t gotten so much as a grunt out of him, Volcker stood up to leave—here I was five foot seven and he’s six seven—and I told him: T’ve finally figured it out. For a man who is six foot seven, 16 percent interest doesn’t seem so high.’”

Like any good central banker, Paul Volcker worried a bit about everything, but one economic factor worried him more than most— wages. The Federal Reserve chairman carried in his pocket a little card on which he kept track of the latest wage settlements by major labor unions. From time to time, he called various people around the country and took soundings on the status of current contract negotiations. What is the UAW asking for? What does organized labor think? Volcker wanted wages to fall, the faster the better. In crude terms, the Fed was determined to break labor.

This preoccupation turned up repeatedly in his public speeches, though never stated so bluntly. He told a National Press Club audience that the “signs of progress on the inflation front” were heartening. But, Volcker added, “I would be less than frank if I failed to point out those signs have not yet been confirmed by clearly visible and significant progress toward wage deceleration.”

By the fourth quarter of 1981, the inflation rate had fallen well below double digits, but compensation for employees was still increasing at a rate of more than 10 percent. “The fact is a conflict may be brewing between high nominal wage expectations and economic policies needed to curb inflation,” Volcker warned.

When White House officials congratulated themselves on how swiftly inflation was declining, Volcker pulled out his card on union wages and warned them not to be too optimistic. Until labor got the message and surrendered on its wage demands, the underlying rate of inflation would continue to push prices upward—and collide with the stringent reality imposed by the Fed’s money policy.

“Volcker wanted to break the back of wage trends just as much as he wanted to break commodity price speculation,” David Stockman said. “Kudlow and I were telling him that inflation would come down fast. He said, “Nope, it can’t happen. Wages are about two-thirds of GNP, and inflation can’t come down faster until labor unit costs come down faster.’”

With his public messages, Volcker was trying to persuade both labor and management that they had to retreat from the wage and price assumptions of the inflationary era. The Fed really was going to stop inflation, he assured them, and workers would no longer need the protection of generous cost-of-living clauses in their contracts.

In fact, Volcker repeatedly held out this promise: “ . . . the prospect for sustained economic growth and increases in real wages for all Americans will improve as we achieve greater productivity and moderation in the demand for nominal wage increases.”24 Give up your wage demands today in order to guarantee brighter prospects tomorrow.

After a decade of inflation, labor leaders were skeptical, like virtually every other group of economic decision makers. Weak unions had no choice but to yield; but the stronger industrial unions would not graciously grant concessions based on vague promises. If labor and business ignored the warnings, Volcker predicted they would be confronted by a squeeze on corporate profits and, therefore, the loss of jobs. The cost of wages would continue to rise, but in the disinflationary economy, businesses would no longer be able to pass on their rising costs in higher prices. That squeeze would reduce profits, and when profits fell, businesses closed the factories and laid off their workers.

Though Volcker did not say so explicitly, his decisions on monetary policy would necessarily be influenced by this contest of wills with organized labor. For the Federal Open Market Committee, it was not just a question of watching the monetary aggregates or interest rates or even the falling production in the depressed economy. The Fed figured that if it eased credit conditions in response to those indicators, this might be interpreted by labor and business as a sign that the pressure was off.

Inflation would not be securely defeated, Volcker insisted, until all those workers and their unions agreed to accept less. If they were not impressed by words, perhaps the liquidation of several million more jobs would convince them.

At its October 5 meeting, the Federal Open Market Committee chose not to seek faster money growth, even though the recession was now obvious and the basic money supply was still running below its target range. In the past, when recessions took hold, the Fed normally turned its money policy and “leaned against the wind” the other way —injecting more liquidity into the financial system and pulling down interest rates. This time, it held to course.

“The members generally agreed that the evidence currently available did not portend a sharp cumulative contraction in activity in the coming months,” the FOMC minutes said, “though a few nevertheless commented on the risks of a more significant decline.”

At the November 17 meeting, for the first time, the FOMC agreed to use the word “recession” to describe the economic conditions across the nation (five months after the fact). But, again, the policy makers asserted that the contraction should be neither long nor severe. “It was generally thought . . . that the scheduled reduction in federal income tax, the projected increases in defense spending along with other elements in the federal fiscal outlook, and the decline in interest rates most likely would generate an upturn in economic activity by the middle of 1982,” the committee concluded.

In the meantime, the committee members still worried about whether they had convinced the country—organized labor and management, workers and producers—to abandon its long-held inflationary expectations. “Some encouraging signs . . . were noted, but it was also emphasized that such expectations tended to change slowly,” the FOMC warned. “They would be sensitive to judgments about federal budgetary developments, to the nature of the newly negotiated collective bargaining agreements and to perceptions of the course of monetary policy.”

Once again, the FOMC agreed not to raise its short-term targets for its money-supply management. The committee’s directive permitted “somewhat more rapid growth of M-l” but it also advised the operations desk in New York that “moderate shortfalls from the growth path would not be unacceptable.” The complicated syntax and delicate shadings boiled down to the same message: Senator Baker and other critics notwithstanding, the Fed was not ready to let go.25

At first glance, the new banking regulation issued in December looked as if federal regulators were at last getting tough with those go-go bankers who were obsessed with maximum growth. Henceforth, the Federal Reserve and the Comptroller announced jointly, banks would be required to keep a higher minimum of their own capital on hand—the shareholders’ equity, retained profits and loan-loss reserves—as a hedge against reckless expansion. A bank’s capital was its own money, the cushion it relied upon when loans went sour and borrowers failed to meet their obligations. Since the mid-1960s, as banks expanded their lending aggressively and inflation depreciated the value of their capital, the ratio of bank capital to outstanding loans had declined steadily, particularly at the largest banks. The major banks were operating, in effect, with a smaller and smaller safety net.

The Fed, in cooperation with the Comptroller, was now establishing a higher standard of minimum prudence. A bank would be required to maintain a minimum ratio between its capital and its assets or total loan activity—5 percent for larger banks and 6 percent for small-town banks. For every $1 million in its portfolio of outstanding loans and bonds, a large bank would have to hold at least $50,000 as its capital base. Thus, if an aggressive management expanded a bank’s lending rapidly, it would also have to go out and raise more capital, presumably by selling stock, to maintain the basic guarantee of its soundness.

The Fed’s new regulation had one glaring weakness: it exempted the seventeen largest banks in America. These multinational banks were the ones with the weakest capital-to-assets ratios, the megabanks that were most exposed to risk by their own aggressive growth strategies. The list of exempted institutions included all the famous names—Chase Manhattan, Citibank, Manufacturers Hanover, Bank of America, Chemical, Irving Trust, even Morgan Guaranty. They could not meet the new capital standards and so, for the time being, they were given a pass.

The largest single factor responsible for their weakened capital condition was their aggressive lending to the less-developed countries of the world, mainly in Latin America and Asia, the so-called LDCs. For the previous decade, the leading international banks of the U.S. had pushed for a larger and larger share of this global loan market and their capital base had shrunk proportionately. Brazil, Mexico, Argentina, South Korea, the Philippines and Taiwan were the leading borrowers. Collectively, Third World nations had amassed about $400 billion in debts to foreigners, as of 1980, and U.S. banks held about 40 percent of the bank loans.

But the American loans to the developing nations were highly concentrated among a few big banks. More than four-fifths of the lending was done by only twenty-four banks. Their LDC loans constituted a full tenth of their overall business—and added up to 180 percent of their capital base. The nine largest money-center banks were the most aggressive of all. Their risk exposure in less-developed countries had mushroomed to 204 percent of their capital by 1980. In other words, if the Third World nations were to default for some reason, that catastrophe would wipe out—twice over—the capital of the biggest names in American banking.

Medium-sized regional banks and small banks were, on the average, already in compliance with the Fed’s new capital standard. The major banks were far short. In 1981, the seventy or so largest banks averaged a capital-to-assets ratio of only 4.37 percent and, of course, some of the very largest banking institutions were below that average. In order to meet the new minimum, they would have had to raise huge blocs of new capital in a hurry—selling new stock or retaining their profits and cutting back the quarterly dividends for shareholders. Either way, the banks’ stock prices would be sharply depressed. And the bank executives might be confronted by angry stockholders demanding a change of management.26

The major bank executives did not seem the least embarrassed by their aggressive position in the less-developed countries. On the whole, they were proud of it. Walter Wriston, the most forthright among them, openly boasted that these countries were his best customers. The interest-rate returns were higher and loan losses were lower than on domestic lending to American enterprises. In public and in private, Wriston scoffed at critics who perennially warned that America’s largest banks were dangerously overcommitted.

“In my view,” Wriston predicted, “this fear that banks have reached a limit will turn out to be wrong tomorrow, as it always has in the past.” Citibank’s vice chairman, G. A. Costanzo, derided the “doomsday fantasies” of defaulting nations and failing banks. “The concept of banks, flooded with OPEC deposits, chasing loans of deteriorating quality is an Alice in Wonderland fantasy,” he wrote.27

The voices of caution included that of Governor Henry Wallich, the Federal Reserve Board’s leading expert on international finance. Wallich had been gently admonishing the major banks in recent months, without apparent effect. In June 1981, he gave a speech entitled “LDC

Debt—to Worry or Not to Worry,” and answered his own question in the affirmative.

. . . today we are in a transitional phase that in the long run is not sustainable [Wallich warned]. In the short run, it is made to appear sustainable in some degree by inflation, which causes a country to amortize its debts via interest rates. Fundamentally, a good number of countries are borrowing amounts that cannot be continued far into the future without leading to burdens that appear unsustainable from historical experience.28

Wallich was discreetly suggesting to the banks that they slow down, but the major bankers were heading in the opposite direction. According to the executives from Citibank, the biggest LDC borrowers— Brazil and Mexico—were the countries with the brightest prospects for the future. Citibank’s Costanzo declared: “Mexico, after Brazil the second-largest debtor among the LDCs, is in a particularly favorable position as it enters the 1980s. ... On the basis of present trends, Mexico’s external debt may surpass that of Brazil during this decade, reflecting not an uncontrolled deficit but the recognition of unparalleled investment opportunities.”

As a central banker, Wallich felt restrained from challenging these claims more precisely. “You don’t ordinarily publicize the fact that a country’s credit isn’t any good,” he said. “It’s counterproductive and stupid. So it’s not very easy to sound warnings.”

Anthony Solomon, president of the New York Fed and an intimate of Wall Street’s most important bankers, privately lamented their lack of caution:

What I don’t understand is why the major commercial banks pay so little attention to their own country-risk assessments. My guess is that it isn’t the country-risk experts who are too optimistic. It’s the top lending officers of the banks, the senior officers themselves. They watch what other banks are doing. They rely too much on imagery, not enough on risk analysis.

The real cause is the enormous need to be competitive—to show as good a profit sheet as your peers, to show steady growth in the size of the bank. That’s the only way to get the right price-earnings multiples in the stock market. Second, they are consoled by fashion. If everyone else is lending to sovereign LDCs, they feel a little better even if their own country-risk department is suggesting otherwise.

But Volcker himself said very little in public about the dangers inherent in the LDC lending, though he and his colleagues worried in private. At the November meeting of the Federal Advisory Council, they posed a blunt question to the twelve bankers: “Are our banks getting into trouble?” Recession was profitable for banks, but only up to a point. If the liquidation continued long enough, the failure of their loan customers would be multiplied rapidly, and the mounting loan losses would threaten the banks’ own profits and even their solvency.

The bankers on the FAC acknowledged the deteriorating position of their customers, both American businesses and the foreign borrowers. “Credit quality abroad is suffering from the prolonged period of slow economic growth and high interest rates as well as—for some countries—political disturbances and lower export earnings,” the bankers reported, but they added confidently: “The council believes there is a low probability of any significant number of sizable banks getting into serious trouble.”

As for the question of weakening bank capital, the advisory council again saw no cause for alarm. “While there are exceptions among individual banks,” it said, “on balance the council believes that the capital position of the banking system as a whole is adequate.”29

The bankers were looking backward, with confidence. Ever since the first oil-price shock of 1973, the multinational banks in the U.S. and Europe had heard these warnings of impending disaster in the debtor nations. As the oil-producing nations built up hundreds of billions in surplus wealth, the banks recycled the money to the needy, taking deposits from OPEC countries and lending the money to Third World nations that were oil importers and underdeveloped. Men like Wriston figured the LDCs had weathered the first run-up of oil prices in ’73 and there was no reason why they could not adjust to the second oil-price shock of ’79.

Optimistic bankers like Walter Wriston also understood something about the global financial recycling that the carping critics rarely mentioned: the actual result was extraordinarily positive for most of the poorer countries—a decade of high growth rates for their economies, rising levels of income for their citizens, greater productive capacity and the emerging presence of middle-class consumers, the hallmark of social stability. In broad terms, this was the essence of how capitalism was supposed to work—accumulated wealth investing in new enterprises in order to create new jobs and income, new wealth.

Some of the money was wasted and some of it was stolen. But, on the whole, the tens of billions in loans to countries in Latin America and Asia purchased real assets for those regions—new roads and factories, new dams and office buildings and electric-generating plants, the basic components of industrial development. The process was not different from America’s own development in the nineteenth century—when U.S. enterprise borrowed its capital from abroad. Just like an American family borrowing money to buy a home or a farmer buying more land and equipment, it made sense for Brazil and Mexico and most others to go heavily into debt as long as U.S. inflation persisted. The loans would purchase real growth for their economies and would be paid back with cheapened dollars. As long as the LDCs expanded their exports as fast as their foreign borrowing, their capacity to carry more and more debt was undiminished.

“The real news today,” Wriston proclaimed, “is that life is much better for the mass of the world’s population than in any other period of history. In some LDCs, the standard of living has doubled in the last ten years—a feat that even the most dedicated optimists could not have predicted and the pessimists have still not recognized.”

On some occasions in history, private finance could accomplish things on a scale that elected national governments would not dare attempt directly. The foreign aid appropriated by the industrial nations, particularly the United States, was meager compared to the vast flow of capital directed to the development of poorer nations through the commercial banks. Ultimately, the money came from the same people—citizens who lived in the wealthy industrialized nations of the Northern Hemisphere. Consumers in these wealthy countries, America included, paid OPEC higher prices for oil. OPEC’s money piled up in deposits at the banks. And the banks then lent the money to the developing countries of the world.

In bare outline, the global recycling was like a vast program of foreign aid that effectively transferred wealth from rich to poor, without formal political sanction. The industrial governments, including the United States, encouraged financial institutions to carry on the recycling, but kept a discreet distance from the actual decisions. The pace and priorities were controlled by the private bankers. The portable wealth, of course, was owned by the oil-exporting nations, not by Americans, and the international banking system collected its own profitable tolls on the transactions. Still, American and European consumers, unaware of where their money ended up, were underwriting Third World development on a scale they would never have authorized as taxpayers and voters.

“One by one,” Wriston proclaimed proudly in 1981, “we are seeing developing countries finally breaking through the vicious circle of poverty. Far from despairing, I have great hopes for the future of the LDCs in the remaining years of this century.”

But Wriston’s optimism looked backward. Worried experts like Henry Wallich were looking forward, convinced that the future was not going to look like the past. For one thing, the LDC debt had begun to escalate more rapidly in the late 1970s and the quality of the projects it financed became increasingly questionable. Closer to home, some of the largest U.S. banks were now stretching the rules on their country-by-country risk exposure—putting too many eggs in one basket, as bankers would say.

The financial condition of the borrowing countries was, meanwhile, deteriorating. They were compelled to pay the higher real interest rates imposed by the Fed’s tight monetary policy, rolling over loans at higher and higher prices, going deeper into debt just to stay even. Yet their economies were no longer expanding robustly as they had in the 1970s, but sinking. Their best market for exports, the United States, was in recession itself.

In a direct sense, the Federal Reserve itself was inducing crisis through its unrelenting campaign against inflation. If inflation really was brought to a halt, as the Fed intended, a financial bind of epic dimensions could unfold. The fundamentals of credit would be reversed for these nations, just as it would for domestic borrowers in the United States. The real value of their debts would appreciate with the U.S. dollar, rather than decline. The LDCs might be stuck with a mountain of debts they could no longer repay, and America’s most prestigious banks would be stuck with a mountain of bad loans they could no longer collect.

The Federal Reserve was, in effect, risking global financial disorder, hoping the conflicting forces would work themselves out without a collision. As a staff economist in the Fed’s international division explained:

The problems of the Third World debt were crystal clear to the sophisticated people at the Fed. When they disinflated, they knew the disinflation would reduce the imports we were taking in from those countries. At the same time interest rates were going up, LDC exports were falling. They were in a squeeze. The Fed knew this was going to be a dangerous side effect—the Achilles’ heel of the whole process.

The dilemma was itself a source of some guilt among the Federal Reserve governors, or at least regret. The bind that now confronted less-developed countries (and ultimately their bankers) could have been avoided if the Federal Reserve had asserted its regulatory authority earlier and more forcefully. The central bank failed to restrain foreign lending by the commercial banks and, instead, allowed them to keep expanding their LDC risks while their bank capital declined. In the late 1970s, an interagency council composed of the Fed and the other regulatory agencies had adopted guidelines for country-bycountry risk exposure and issued mild warnings from time to time, but the major banks paid little attention.

“Winking and nodding” at the banks did not really have much effect, as Volcker himself acknowledged. If the Fed wanted the banks to moderate their foreign-loan risks, it might have adopted hard-and-fast rules and enforced them. The new regulation on capital ratios— in addition to exempting the seventeen largest banks that had the largest problems—came much too late in the game to make a difference.

“It’s really regrettable,” Henry Wallich admitted, “that we didn’t put any teeth in the country-exposure regulations. The banks reported to us regularly, but we didn’t do anything about it. Examiners raised questions. In some cases, they got a response. Other banks said, ‘These stupid examiners—what do they know?’”

The Federal Reserve, for all its legendary power, behaved in this crucial matter much like other regulatory agencies of the federal government. It yielded to the ambitions of the industry it was supposed to regulate, instead of enforcing the larger public interest. Federal Reserve officials might worry that the largest commercial banks, the Fed’s primary constituency, were pursuing a dangerous course, but the Fed lacked the will to discipline them.

The explanation offered by some was bureaucratic. “What people don’t realize is that bureaucrats live in the same culture as everyone else,” an assistant to Volcker said. “Who do bank examiners talk to? They talk to bankers. There was a general lack of skepticism.” But the Federal Reserve’s failure did not originate with the bank examiners. It started at the top.

Paul Volcker did not hold a high opinion, at least privately, of bankers’ capacity for prudent judgment. “Volcker sees bankers as subject to fad and whim, almost incapable of making short-term sacrifices for their own long-term interest,” one of the chairman’s close associates said. “I suspect he sees that as an aspect of American businessmen generally.”

Yet, aside from occasional attempts at private persuasion, Paul Volcker did very little to forestall the developing crisis. He did not sound a general alarm. He did not ask Congress to support the Federal Reserve in a frontal effort to restrain the banks. He did not, until late in the day, impose new rules that would compel the banks to pull back. His predecessor, William McChesney Martin, offered a harsh assessment of Volcker’s performance as Federal Reserve chairman: Volcker was “very good” in conducting monetary policy but “a complete flop on bank supervision.”30

Charles Partee, the Fed governor in charge of the board’s subcommittee on bank supervision, conceded:

It’s true we didn’t force these people to act better. But Bill Martin knows better than anyone else in the world how difficult it is to get the community

of big banks to change its behavior. You say to Walter Wriston, “Walt, you’ve got to get your ship in order.” Why, hell, Wriston thinks he’s bigger than the government. You don’t get him to do anything by persuasion and argument, that’s for sure.

When Fed officials did try to warn the banks about their growing exposure on foreign lending, they were brushed aside, Partee said. “You look at the bank’s portfolio and try to point out the potential problems,” he said. “When this was done in 1980 and 1981, our examination people were told: ‘You don’t understand the situation. We know better than you.’ There was almost no decent response from the banks—until, of course, their loans got into great difficulty.”

By itself, this explanation represented a damaging admission. The mystique of the Fed held that commercial bankers trembled at the slightest frown from the central bank and dared not offend it. The reality, at least for the largest and most influential banks, was quite the opposite. The Fed was too weak to make its word stick. The regulators’ pleas of impotence contradicted the myth, but they were also an evasion. The Federal Reserve was empowered by Congress to attend to these dangers. When it failed to do so, the excuses did not sound so different from those offered by other regulatory agencies that fell captive to the regulated.

The defensive explanations disclosed a deeper reality about the Federal Reserve, however, that was even more devastating to the mythology. The Federal Reserve’s regulation of private banks was conditioned and restrained by politics and political influence. Governor Partee, among others, cited the inhibition of political pressures to explain why the Federal Reserve had not been tougher on the banks.

We’re not talking about the little banks; they’re pretty well behaved [Partee said]. We’re talking about the top fifty banks. They have extraordinary clout in the financial and business and political worlds. They will speak back to you. “You’re being unreasonable. You’re trying to retard economic development.” They’ll go around to back doorways and complain to senators that the regulators are being too tough. It’s like pulling teeth to go against them.

The chairman himself did not disagree. The Fed, he conceded, was “too passive generally in regulation and supervision of banks, particularly through the seventies.” In his own defense, Paul Volcker pleaded the same argument—politics.

Anyone who thinks you can run bank regulation independent from the general political climate doesn’t understand [Volcker said]. Suppose the

Federal Reserve would have decided to be tougher in the seventies. There would have been an outcry, from the banks and the congressmen who get their contributions, from everyone who was sold on deregulation. “What the hell are you talking about? We haven’t had a banking loss for thirty years. So what the hell are you doing with new regulations?” Congressmen would come at us. “Why do you regulators think you know more than our bank CEOs?”

The Fed would get tougher with the major banks only if Volcker could think the “general political climate” would support him. This is not the disinterested and aloof institution described in most literature on the Federal Reserve. The Fed responded to the political influence of bankers, as the Department of Agriculture responded to agricultural interests, or the Interstate Commerce Commission responded to truckers.

In the meantime, Volcker and the other governors did not see that they had much choice but to go forward with what they had started and hope for the best. If inflation abated and the Fed could restart the economy soon enough, the debt crisis could be averted. If the Fed held tight long enough, some major borrowers would be in deep trouble and so would their bankers.

The leading candidate for failure was a nation of 68 million people —Mexico. By the close of 1981, Volcker and other senior Fed officers recognized the danger signs on Mexico’s national balance sheet— declining export income and rising spending and borrowing. “It was as clear as the hand before your face that Mexico was getting into trouble,” Volcker said, “but there wasn’t much you could do for Mexico.”

An exquisite predicament confronted Volcker and the other governors. After all the promises they had made about breaking inflation and all the public skepticism about the Fed’s commitment, how could they back away from what they had begun? Yet the largest risk in proceeding against inflation was to the financial system, whose soundness they were supposed to protect. Wisely or foolishly, they decided it was too late to turn back. Their former colleague Philip Coldwell, who had retired from the Board of Governors the year before, described their thinking:

The banks still believed that the world was made of green cheese and that it was going to go on forever. A number of people were raising warning flags, but the Fed was embarked on a major recession to take care of inflation. You were going to kill off inflationary fervor and you had to keep it going. You could play at the fringes with capital ratios and warnings to the banks, but you couldn’t reverse the policy.

Throughout 1981, the Federal Reserve clearly overdid it, restraining money growth so tightly that it undershot its own goal for the year. The Federal Open Market Committee had set its target range between 3.5 and 6 percent, but M-l grew by only 2.3 percent in 1981. If the statistical difference seemed slight, the damaging effects multiplied through the entire economy, depressing it further than the Fed had intended.

While home builders, labor unions, small-business men and others complained, the bankers of the Federal Advisory Council congratulated the governors on their performance. “The council is unanimous in the belief that the current monetary policy is appropriate,” the FAC declared at its November meeting. “. . . The conduct of monetary policy during 1981, which has avoided the large variations in growth experienced during 1980, has strengthened the credibility of the Fed in the marketplace.”31

Yet, a few weeks later, the Fed’s credibility was under attack from financial markets and the White House as well. After six months of sluggish growth, M-l began surging again, abruptly and somewhat mysteriously. The basic measure of the money supply started accelerating in November, then expanded by nearly 13 percent in December and grew even faster—by nearly 20 percent—in the opening weeks of 1982. To monetarists, it looked as though the Fed was losing control again, or else its nerve. Cries of alarm went up in many quarters, from the bond market to the President himself.

At a January 19 press conference, President Reagan was asked about declining capital investment and how that affected his economic program. His answer directed blame to the Federal Reserve’s inconstant monetary policy.

“I think there’s a little caution at work,” Reagan said, “and perhaps part of that is waiting to see what the Federal Reserve is doing, because there’s been an upsurge, for example, in the money supply just recently, which sends, I think, the wrong signal to the money markets.”32

A few days earlier, Representative Jack Kemp had called for Paul Volcker’s resignation. If the President was upset with the Fed’s performance, did he agree with Congressman Kemp? Reagan sidestepped the question but did not offer an endorsement of the chairman. “I can’t respond to that,” Reagan said, “because the Federal Reserve System is autonomous . . . They’re not serving at anyone’s pleasure.”

Four months earlier, when the recession was first visible, officials of the Reagan Administration had suggested belatedly that the Fed was too tight. Now, deep into the recession, they complained that the Fed was too loose. “Some have accused us of being unable to make up our minds,” Treasury Secretary Regan acknowledged. “Nothing could be further from the truth. We supported the Federal Reserve’s targets and consistently urged them to keep money growth even and steady within the target ranges.”33

It was not a big deal to get the President’s statement made [a senior White House official said]. It came up in the weekly economic group. Don Regan would come in and report on monetary policy, influenced by Sprin-kel, and give a heavy argument about the Fed’s volatility. Stockman was partly a monetarist and partly happy to create economic disaster in order to get fiscal action. Stockman would generally support the notion that we had to worry about the Fed loosening too much. The rest of the players were skeptical of the monetarist wisdom, but not yet confident of an alternative wisdom.

The President’s shot at the Fed reflected the monetarists’ anxieties about the money numbers. Beryl Sprinkel had first warned in mid-December about the “burst of money growth.” “Recent increases in money combined with public speculation about the budget have reinforced fears about the prospects for long-term monetary control,” he had advised the White House. Like many other economists, Sprinkel was convinced that economic recovery would begin in the early months of 1982, but only if the Fed remained loyal to the principle of steady and moderate money expansion. By January, the alarm over M-l had become stronger, and the President’s advisers had agreed that, once again, Volcker must be scolded, not only in private but also in public.34

“Perhaps the jump in money is only a temporary phenomenon, a result of technical problems . . . ,” Lawrence Kudlow had advised the senior White House counselors just prior to the President’s press conference, “but there are numerous other signals suggesting a basic change in monetary policy from steady restraint to alarming expansion.”

Kudlow saw a second danger lurking in the situation—one that could blight Republican prospects in the ’82 congressional elections. If the Fed continued to let money grow too rapidly now, it might be forced into a sharp tightening a few months hence and thus stifle the new economic recovery just as it was beginning.

“As a best guess,” Kudlow said, “real growth in the first quarter of 1982 is likely to be flat, but this could represent a turning zone for the economy and lead to much stronger growth in the second quarter. However, a combination of rising interest rates and a belated monetary correction could create a 1982 second half which is more sluggish. The recovery could become a nonevent.”35

The monetarist critique led the White House to turn the heat on Paul Volcker again. For the Fed chairman, it must have seemed an odd moment in his political relationships. On Capitol Hill, Republican leaders like Howard Baker were imploring him to bring down interest rates. At the White House and Treasury, Republican officials were insisting that he bring down M-l. It was not evident that politicians at either end of Pennsylvania Avenue recognized the contradiction. Volcker could please one group or the other, but there was no way in the physical world that he could please both.

Even if the Federal Reserve chairman chose to ignore the politicians, he still had to deal with the message from financial markets. Over several months, as business activity declined, so had interest rates. The Federal Funds rate, once hovering near 20 percent, was allowed to decline to 12.5 percent by December. When M-l started accelerating, however, the financial markets began bidding up both short-term and long-term rates.

The Federal Reserve had taught the money-market traders to take M-l seriously and so they did. When M-l surged, the markets assumed the Fed would soon have to tighten again and that would raise interest rates, and so they anticipated the tightening by bidding up rates themselves, just for self-protection. Volcker’s monetarist operating system had created a strange circle of existential reality surrounding money: if the Fed said M-l was real, then financial markets thought so too, and the Fed reacted to what the financial markets thought was real, even if the Fed privately thought the markets were mistaken. The money market and the bond market were “calling for” higher interest rates. Yet the real economy was in recession. Did it make sense to tighten money again in the midst of a contraction?

“Increasingly,” Volcker said, “the market commentary was that the money supply was too high, inflation was still too high and inflation was going to revive if the money supply didn’t come down.”

The chairman might be privately disdainful of the “market commentary,” but he was not prepared to go against it. M-l might well be giving off a false signal. Certainly, the sudden surge was not caused by a resurgent economy or by any change of policy at the Federal Reserve, as the White House economists suspected. Fed economists didn’t fully understand it themselves, but they recognized that the shifting composition of the monetary aggregates—actually, the changing patterns of where people stored their money—scrambled the traditional meaning of M-l. During 1981, the FOMC had tried to follow the money aggregates as the gauge for its policy and had been seriously misled. That might be happening again. Yet, if the financial markets and the banks believed in M-l, how could the central bank suddenly announce that it had lost faith?

All through January, Fed officials had long conversations among themselves, trying to figure out the puzzling surge in money growth. It might be simply that people were “parking” their savings in interestbearing NOW accounts, thus swelling M-l artificially. Or perhaps the fears induced by rising unemployment were making people more cautious and so they kept more idle cash on hand, but did not spend it. Or maybe it was the steady decline in interest rates over the previous four months. As rates fell, the “opportunity cost” of keeping large balances in noninterest-bearing checking accounts was reduced and so businesses and individuals felt less incentive to move the money elsewhere. All these factors could explain why M-l was growing rapidly in December and January, yet was irrelevant to the real economy.

When the Federal Open Market Committee met on February 1, the puzzlement over money’s true meaning was the main grist of the committee’s lengthy discussion. The public’s demand for money seemed to be increasing, but not the desire to spend it. Indeed, if the public was holding on to its money longer, that meant money velocity, the rate at which it turned over in new transactions, was actually slowing down. If that was the case, it would undermine all the careful calculations about M-l and its relationship to the economy. The money supply might actually be tight compared to demand, even though it appeared money was easy because M-l was growing so fast.

“We faced a giant-sized dilemma,” Governor Lyle Gramley said. “We had horrendous increases in M-l growth. We knew that some of this had to be explained by the new types of accounts and the greater response to interest rate changes. But we can’t know how much. Meanwhile, we were very concerned that we not accommodate too much money growth because we were anxious not to lose our credibility.”

Gramley, considered one of the most astute forecasters on the board, was among those predicting a relatively mild, brief recession. He thought it would be over by the first or second quarter of 1982.

“I agonized over what to do with these goddamned money numbers,” Gramley said. “In fact, it was very hard to determine whether we were implementing a very tight monetary policy or a rather accommodative one.”

This was the “monetarist box” that some Fed economists had feared. For lots of reasons, the monetary aggregates were suspect. If the Federal Reserve faithfully followed M-l as the basis for its policy decisions, it could create a large and damaging error for the economy. Yet, if the Fed abandoned M-l and based its monetary policy on other factors, it would be denounced for apostasy by the Fed watchers of Wall Street and the monetarist critics in the Reagan Administration.

“Volcker understood the shifts in the aggregates,” Fred Schultz said. “He understood that, but he had to balance it off against the goal of really changing inflationary expectations. If we moved away from the rather mechanical system we were using, we did so at the risk of some loss of credibility we’d been trying to build up.”

The chairman was still haunted by the experience of 1980 when the Fed had lost control of money. “I think Volcker would tell you that one of his biggest mistakes was in the summer of 1980,” said John Paulus, the former Fed staff economist at Morgan Stanley. “He gave away all of the benefits of that recession in 1980. In February 1982, they were concerned that somehow they had initiated another explosion of money—and, remember, they had already blown one of these things before. The Fed asked itself: are we going to do it again?”

This time Volcker would respond faster to the surging M-l. “Most of the business forecasts were calling for a recovery soon,” Volcker explained. “There was a fairly common feeling that the money supply was very high. It took a big bounce. We were not easing. That would run against the projections. The best thing to do was sit there and sort it out and see if the money supply got down.”

Inside the FOMC, Volcker’s position was sold as the middle-of-the-road approach—not clamping down as severely as some of the monetarist Reserve Bank presidents wanted to do, but also not easing, as conditions in the real economy seemed to require. The Fed would keep the faith and continue to follow M-l as its guide, thus reassuring the skeptics in Wall Street.

In practical fact, the Federal Reserve did tighten, however, despite the depressed state of the American economy. “Taking account of the recent surge in growth of M-l,” the FOMC directive stated, “the committee seeks no further growth in M-l for the January-to-March period. . . . Some decline in M-l would be . . . acceptable in the context of reduced pressure in the money market.” In hard, straightforward terms, this was a decision to let interest rates go higher.

For Frank Morris, president of the Boston Fed, it was too much. Morris had been disenchanted with Volcker’s monetarist targets for many months and now he saw the operating system forcing the Fed into serious error. Given the voting rotation for Reserve Bank presidents, Morris did not get to vote on the February directive, but he could speak against it. He urged his colleagues to recognize that the M-l target was misleading them again and they were about to make a most improbable choice—raising interest rates anew when the economy was still declining.

Morris took the unusual step a few weeks later of repeating his arguments in public. “The thing that really made me decide to go public was when the money supply increased and the Federal Reserve pushed short-term interest rates higher, even though there was a recession,” Morris said. “I thought that was a mistake. But it was a mistake demanded by the rigid system we had adopted.”

In a speech before an economics conference at the Atlanta Fed, Morris described in theory and in fact why the monetary aggregates were no longer reliable and again urged his colleagues to abandon the system. “We are in a Catch-22 situation,” he said, “in that the one thing we are well positioned to control through bank reserves, M-l, is no longer a meaningful target for monetary policy.”

Morris proposed that the Fed instead base its policy decisions on other indicators—the growth of all liquid assets or total debt in the real economy or even a broad goal for the size of nominal GNP. If the confusing mystique of the Ms was discarded in favor of more familiar economic guideposts, the public (and the politicians) would at least have a better grasp of what the Federal Reserve was actually doing— regulating overall credit and growth for the entire national economy. “One advantage of the nominal GNP as a goal is that it would upgrade the quality of the dialogue on monetary policy,” Morris said.36

The Boston Fed president did not make much headway with his colleagues, some of whom did not believe it would make the central bank’s job any easier if the general public understood monetary policy. Solomon of the New York Fed shared Morris’s doubts on the Ms but was not yet prepared to abandon the monetary aggregates. Others were also troubled by the “monetarist box,” but they were more worried that the Fed’s reputation would suffer with financial investors, traders and bankers if it changed its operating methods.





With Volcker, they voted for a middle course and hoped it would dampen money growth moderately, preserve the Fed’s credibility with financial markets and not interfere with the recovery they expected soon for the real economy.

The decision was perhaps the single gravest error that the Fed policy makers committed during the liquidation of 1981-1982. Their misinterpretations of money and policy mistakes back in early 1981 were at least in step with their general intentions. Volcker and the others were willing then to “err on the hard side” and they were not exactly surprised by the recession that followed their decisions. But, this time, the excessive tightening was not intentional. The consequences for the economy were far more damaging than anything they anticipated.

The result of the February directive was not the moderate holding action described by Volcker and other FOMC members. Instead the Federal Reserve allowed the Federal Funds rate and other short-term interest rates to climb as much as 300 basis points over a few weeks, rising from about 12.5 percent to a peak of 15.6 percent. For the struggling economy, it was as though the Fed had waited until the bull was staggering to its feet, then hit the beast with another hard blow and knocked it to its knees.

The extreme nature of what they did was reflected most starkly in what happened to the relative levels of short-term and long-term rates. Previously, when the Federal Reserve had pushed short rates higher than long rates and held them there, that eventually had induced an economic contraction. Then, as the economy declined and the demand for credit subsided, short-term rates fell back to their normal position, below the long-term rates. This time, in the middle of recession, the Fed actually pushed the short-term rates back up again to contractionary levels above long-term rates. Three-month Treasury bill rates, for instance, exceeded the composite rate for the long-term Treasury bonds. It was as if the central bank had decided to start the recession all over again.

Roughly speaking, that was what occurred. The American economy did not turn around in the next few months and begin growing again. It sank lower and lower. The recovery predicted by so many forecasters, including Federal Reserve governors, for the second quarter of 1982 did not appear.

Instead, the recession would continue many months longer than anyone had expected, multiplying the personal losses and business crises as the economy contracted further. Several million additional jobs would be liquidated and tens of thousands more businesses. Perhaps most alarming and embarrassing for the central bankers, the financial system itself would become frayed and shaky as banks and other lending institutions were pushed to the brink by the deepening failure of their customers, the debtors.

No one could say, of course, what might have happened if the Federal Open Market Committee had chosen a different course. The Fed never acknowledges mistakes officially and always finds other economic explanations for what happens when its own forecasts do not come to pass. It is clear in hindsight, however, that Fed policy makers were especially defensive about this decision. Volcker and his former personal assistant, E. Gerald Corrigan, the president of the Minneapolis Fed, both claimed, for instance, that the Fed had not tightened its monetary policy in the February directive, but merely declined to ease.

The record of what happened to money and interest rates, not to mention the real economy, indicated otherwise. The monthly growth of M-l decelerated abruptly, from above 19 percent in January to less than 1 percent in February. Interest rates responded accordingly by rising. The Fed Funds rate climbed from 12 to above 15 percent. Still another indication of how tightly the Fed was holding down liquidity was the surge in daily borrowing by commercial banks at the Discount window—Discount borrowing rose to $4 billion as the banks scrambled for scarce funds in a very tight money market. None of this would have occurred if Volcker had been pursuing the neutral, steady-as-you-go monetary policy that he claimed.

Others at the Fed were more candid about their fateful error. Lyle Gramley, for one, regretted the February decision. He had been a System man for nearly thirty years, and inside the institution, Gramley was regarded as the intellectual conscience of the Fed, more representative of its permanent values than perhaps even the chairman.

“In retrospect, if I had it to do over again, I would follow a policy of more expansion,” Gramley conceded. “I was deeply concerned about what we were doing, but I was also concerned about the tremendous growth in the aggregates. It seemed to me this might be signaling an upturn in the economy.”

But shortly it became clear that the FOMC’s analysis of the money-supply surge had been mistaken. “We were tighter than we knew we were,” Gramley concluded. “In the midst of recession, interest rates started to go up again. That’s very unusual.”

Why did the economic recovery not unfold as predicted? Gramley’s answer suggested that the Fed itself was to blame. “Interest rates were very high,” he said. “Pessimism was widespread. The dollar was beginning to affect the economy. We really didn’t perceive the impact.

A senior staff economist at one of the Reserve Banks was more explicit: “We would never have had 11 percent unemployment, we would have had less of a crisis in the Third World, and we would not have pushed the economy down so far if there had been less tightening. We made up for our sins in 1977 and 1978 by overdoing it in 1981 and 1982.”

Yet the Reagan White House was pleased when it learned of the FOMC’s February decision. The senior political advisers were still listening to the monetarist economists, who assured them that this was the right prescription for economic recovery. Since monetarists believed that financial markets set interest rates, not the Fed, they also believed that reducing the bulge in M-l would reassure the markets and allow interest rates to subside. From their perspective, it looked as though the President’s public complaint and the private hectoring of Volcker had produced the desired result—the Fed was shaping up. Economic theory prevailed over political common sense.

On Valentine’s Day, the President and the Federal Reserve chairman met again in the Oval Office and, once again, exchanged vows of mutual commitment to controlling money and halting inflation. Volcker mentioned the federal deficits. Reagan expressed his deep convictions about ruinous deficit spending. A few days later, the President volunteered a hearty endorsement of Paul Volcker and the central bank.

I want to make it clear today that neither this Administration nor the Federal Reserve will allow a return to the fiscal and monetary policies of the past that have created the current conditions [the President told a news conference]. I have met with Chairman Volcker several times during the past year. We met again earlier this week. I have confidence in the announced policies of the Federal Reserve Board. The Administration and the Federal Reserve can help bring inflation and interest rates down faster by working together than by working at cross-purposes.37

Treasury Secretary Regan, feeling bullish again, predicted to reporters that the American economy would come “roaring back like a lion” by springtime. Nervous political advisers at the White House hoped he was right.

On Wall Street, the reaction was also good. John Paulus, chief economist at Morgan Stanley and monetary-policy forecaster for the investment-banking house, was pleased by the tightening because he had predicted it. “I was calling for higher interest rates and I was right,” Paulus said. “If you make a big call and you’re right, it’s not going to cost you anything and it might mean a little reward on your bonus.”

As for the real economy, Paulus dismissed the argument that it was wrong for the Federal Reserve to add further injury by raising interest rates in the middle of the recession. “It may sound cruel and cavalier,” he said, “but I thought that anything they could get out of the recession in terms of wringing out inflation was worth any pain in the short term.”38

Neither John Paulus, of course, nor his firm nor most of the financial community in Wall Street would themselves experience any of this worthy “pain,” either in the short term or the long term.





