13 SLAUGHTER OF THE INNOCENTS


The practice of closing factories and consigning workers to involuntary idleness seemed utterly natural to most everyone in the late twentieth century. Individual workers might plead for reprieve or complain bitterly about their fate, but few questioned the larger logic that produced the disruptions. It was the inherent right of private property. The owners of capital and their corporate managers must be free to withdraw their productive facilities from the economy, to close the doors and send the workers home and wait until business conditions improved.

The principles that governed business economics required them to do so. Lawrence Kudlow had explained it to his White House colleagues: “The heart of the business situation is always the outlook for profits. When the combination of rising costs and falling inflation [prices] squeezes profits, then production and employment must be cut back.”1

In an earlier era, Thorstein Veblen called this practice “the legal right of sabotage.” By sabotage, he meant that business managers must be willing, on occasion, to disrupt the free flow of economic activity in order to maintain the maximum net gain for invested capital. The heart of the management problem, Veblen observed, was always supply—the need to limit the output of goods or services so that the supply would not exceed the market’s demand and thus drive down prices and profits. When demand from willing buyers declined and surplus inventories piled up, the managers might first cut prices in order to stimulate sales. When that failed, they stopped producing.

“It is not possible, on sound business grounds, to let the industrial forces of the country go to work and produce what, in the physical sense, the country needs,” Veblen explained, “because a free run of production would, it is believed, be ruinous for business. . . .”2

“Sabotage” was a word Veblen borrowed from the Wobblies, the radical labor movement of his era that rejected economic orthodoxy and was eventually eclipsed by the more conservative unions that formed the AFL-CIO. The conventional trade unions, in fact, embraced the principle of supply limitation themselves; the central aim of their long political struggle was to obtain the same power for workers. Farmers, once the independent yeomanry, recognized that they too must collectively protect themselves from the ruinous swings of supply and demand in the marketplace. When Veblen wrote his last essays in the 1920s, both of these important groups were vulnerable to periodic catastrophe because neither had the ability to control the supply of what they sold—labor and farm commodities.

The reforms enacted in the New Deal era were intended to overcome such weaknesses. The federal farm programs controlled the production of commodities with acreage limits and price guarantees and thus stabilized agricultural markets. With managed harvests, farmers would not be confronted perennially by the gluts of corn or cotton that collapsed their prices (the oil industry won similar protective legislation designed to limit the supply of oil). Labor unions, likewise, were granted limited legal powers to control access to jobs in the factories they organized. If wage conditions required it, unions could withdraw their labor en masse from the economy by calling a strike. Both reforms, Veblen would have noted, were not different in principle from the business manager’s willingness to close the factory. Each group was empowered to “sabotage” production in order to protect its own net gain (public opinion, it was true, seemed more inclined to be morally offended by the spectacle of a farmer who plowed under his cotton or striking workers who withheld their labor than by a corporation that closed its factories).

These elementary facts became particularly relevant to the contraction of 1981-1982 because, by the 1980s, the New Deal reforms that protected labor and agriculture had already lost their effectiveness. For several decades after World War II, the supply-control methods had substantially enhanced wage-bargaining power for major unions and successfully propped up farm prices. Over many years, however, both systems were destabilized—and partly by inflation.

The steady escalation of prices gave every farmer an incentive to increase his production despite the acreage limits imposed by the government—to grow more and more wheat or corn or cotton on the same land. The supply limits encouraged the capital-intensive agricultural methods that could raise per acre yields by extraordinary amounts. American farmers, despite government controls, produced staggering abundance and embarrassing surpluses (surpluses that were sold to the government if the global market could not absorb them). In the process, farmers obligated themselves to larger and larger operating debts—the capital borrowed and repaid every year to purchase the large-scale machinery, fertilizers and pesticides required to turn out the high yields. Even a modest-sized farm might be carrying $500,000 or more in revolving bank loans in order to operate on a few hundred acres. Capital-intensive agriculture required huge debts —burdens mitigated by price inflation. When prices fell in 1982, so did the farm values that supported the agricultural debt. Income and collateral shrank and the farm foreclosures began.

Labor unions, meanwhile, had also lost much of their power to control the access to jobs. Corporations, facing their own cost squeeze on profits, had discovered how to escape the wage demands of organized labor. They simply moved the factories away from the unions. Manufacturing jobs were relocated, first, from the industrial North to the underdeveloped South, where willing workers accepted lower wages and the absence of union protection. Next, the jobs were moved overseas to low-wage countries around the world. When factories were closed by the 1981-1982 recession, union power was already ebbing dramatically. Many of the American plants never opened again because managers concluded that now was the time to find cheaper workers elsewhere.

As Veblen explained, the corporate managers were not entirely free to choose. A sensitive CEO, mindful of the human damage caused by unemployment, might postpone a plant closing for a time, but eventually his softheartedness would be punished. Sooner or later, the stockholders—the “absentee owners.'’ as Veblen called them—would see that he was sacrificing the company’s net gain (and their dividends) in order to keep his employees at work and they would simply withdraw their capital—by dumping their stocks. As the stock price declined, shareholders would begin clamoring for new management.

The corporate decisions were also intimately supervised and disciplined by the managers of credit, the banks and brokerages that provided capital and operating loans. In many cases, important bankers sat on the boards of directors of major corporations so they could watch their money more closely. If the banks withdrew their approval and would lend no more, the corporation was doomed to fail.

The principles of “sound business” were, thus, maintained and enforced by a hierarchy of disciplinarians, from the humblest stockholder to the ultimate governor on the credit system, the Federal Reserve. The corporations were necessarily attentive to what lenders and investors demanded in net gain. The banks were the overseers of business prospects and, at the same time, they were guided in their propensity to lend and in the terms they set by the overall expansion of credit, the monetary policy determined by the Fed. The central bank did not examine the balance sheets of individual corporations, but it did closely follow the broad flows of business growth and debt, prices and wages and unemployment. The pinnacle of the system, Veblen said, was “the conservative surveillance of the Federal Reserve.”

Angry factory workers who lost their jobs might blame remote executives at the company’s “home office.” Or they could blame heartless bankers or the greedy “absentee owners.” If they were especially sophisticated, they might even blame the governors of the Federal Reserve. In every case, however, their anger would miss the point. The decision makers, at every level, would reply, correctly, that they were merely agents of the larger logic that governed the political economy. Given the premise of maximum net gain, the choices were required of them. To entertain alternatives, one would have to challenge the underlying principles themselves, to question the dependent relationship between work and capital, to reject the natural supremacy of profit over intangible human cares. Neither farmers nor labor unions were disposed to challenge those deeply held beliefs or able to imagine alternatives that were less insensitive to human suffering.

The net gain in money values [Veblen wrote] is a more convincing reality than productive work or human livelihood. Neither the tenuous things of the human spirit nor the gross material needs of human life can come in contact with this business enterprise in such a way as to deflect its course from the line of least resistance, which is the line of greatest present gain within the law.

As a practical matter, it was too late for concessions. Once launched, the process of economic shrinkage rolled forward on its own momentum and overwhelmed both management and labor. Every month, for nearly two years, the unemployment rate would increase as hundreds of thousands more were turned out of jobs. Eventually, national unemployment would reach a post-Depression record of 10.8 percent.

The A&P food-processing plant in Horseheads, New York, the world’s largest, closed its doors and sent home 1,100 workers. GAF Corporation shut down thirteen roofing plants from New Jersey to California and laid off 1,800 employees. In North Carolina, Wrangler stopped making jeans and another 320 were out of jobs. Texaco laid off 304 workers at its refinery in Tulsa. Ford added another 2,250 to the unemployment rolls from its assembly plant in Lorain, Ohio. General Tire another 1,500 in Akron. On and on, the shutdown proceeded.3

Individual workers and their union locals protested and tried to make last-minute concessions to keep their jobs. Some small-business owners attempted to keep their shops open as long as they could. But resistance was futile; this was precisely how the process of liquidation was meant to work. Andrew Mellon had explained the cure in his chilling dictum back in 1930: “Liquidate labor, liquidate stocks, liquidate the farmers, liquidate real estate.” Thorstein Veblen, Mellon’s contemporary, described it in a different way: “the slaughter of the innocents.”

At the peak, in December 1982, 12 million people were out of work, only 4.4 million of them drawing unemployment compensation. Another 4 or 5 million unemployed were not counted in the official statistics because they were no longer actively seeking jobs at the local unemployment office. Another group, at least as large, was working only part time because of the contraction. In all, the dislocated totaled as many as 20 million American workers.

In their idleness, they also served. In the Marxist phrase, they constituted the “reserve army of the unemployed,” a visible reminder to those who were still working that their jobs and wages were also insecure. The continuing presence of surplus labor was central to the process of disinflation. By first breaking wages, business could reduce its costs and, thus, retain its profit margins without the necessity of raising prices.

“People didn’t talk about it,” said Anthony Solomon of the New York Fed, “but it was quite clear. You were going to have to have some recessionary adjustment in wages. You won’t get price flexibility without adjustments in labor and other costs.”

While the liquidation closed large factories and small shops everywhere, the distress was not evenly distributed across the economy. The millions of unemployed were concentrated in the industrial core of America—manufacturing, mining and construction sectors that traditionally had the strongest unions and the highest blue-collar wages. In the automobile industry, unemployment would reach a peak of 23 percent. In steel and other primary metals, 29 percent. In construction, 22 percent. In appliances and other fabricated metal products, 19 percent. In rubber and plastics, 15 percent. In apparel and other textiles, 13 percent.4

In Detroit, radio stations played a wry country-music song for their unemployed listeners. An old favorite had celebrated the independent spirit of the blue-collar worker: “Take This Job and Shove It.” The new song lamented: “I Wish I Had a Job to Shove.”

The liquidation of business enterprises was, likewise, highly selective. About 66,000 firms filed for bankruptcy protection in 1982, the highest level since the great contraction of 1929-1932, and most of these were smaller companies that could not bear up under the strain that both declining sales and higher interest rates put on their cash flow. Dun & Bradstreet reported 24,900 cases of “business failure” in 1982, in which the company ceased operations entirely, its assets were sold off and creditors were forced to write off their loans as a loss.

This was the worst year for “business failures” that D&B had recorded since 1933 and more than three times the failure rate in 1979. The 24,900 failed companies liquidated $15.6 billion in uncollectible debts. The largest numbers of failures were in retailing and construction, but the largest losses in terms of the dollar value of the defaulted credit were in mining and manufacturing.5

The burden of economic loss, nevertheless, was borne mainly by workers and their families. The Urban Institute calculated that the national economy lost $570 billion in output from 1981 to 1983 due to the recession and that 59 percent of this lost income was absorbed by labor—workers who lost their jobs or had their wage gains reduced. Declining corporate profits accounted for 25 percent of the loss, and most of the remainder was absorbed by farmers and small-business proprietors. In social terms, nearly three-fourths of the nation’s economic loss was suffered by citizens whom most people would describe as “little guys”—industrial workers, individual entrepreneurs, farmers. These were the later day equivalents of Andrew Jackson’s “real people.” The bone and sinew of the country, he called them.

In the Urban Institute’s study, the actual loss per household was estimated to be an average nationwide of $3,309 (or $3,837 if losses from the 1980 recession were included). The national average was misleading, however, because the unemployment was highly concentrated in certain sectors and the overwhelming majority of American families were not affected by it. In crude terms, the average loss for families that were actually dislocated by the recession was at least three or four times greater—at least $10,000 and for many families much more.

“Recessions are not equal opportunity disemployers,” the Urban Institute observed. “The odds of being drafted into the fight against inflation increase steadily the lower an individual’s earnings and family income [are] to begin with . . . the 1981-82 recession drove 4.3 million more people into poverty . . . Black men suffered the most of all.”6

The economic consequences were barely noticed by some groups and, in fact, some sectors flourished throughout the recession. Manufacturing was shrinking, but the so-called service sector of the economy actually continued to expand throughout the 1981-1982 recession, adding 1.5 million jobs. In its broadest usage, “services” meant any work or business that did not produce something tangible for sale. So the general term covered everything from neighborhood drugstores to the largest banks and brokerages, from laundries to airlines and insurance companies. Service jobs ranged from the menial to the most specialized, maids and lawyers, short-order cooks and stockbrokers, key-punch operators and molecular biologists. During the recession, one growth area for service jobs involved the spreading use of computers and high-tech careers. Another growth area was finance and banking, riding the resurgence of financial assets.7

The 1981-1982 recession dealt out personal rewards and punishments like an inverted pyramid of economic justice: the least suffered most and vice versa. In contrast to previous contractions, real per capita income, after discounting for inflation, actually increased slightly through the course of the contraction, while the overall economy was shrinking. One reason for this anomaly was the continuing growth of the government’s income-transfer programs through which Washington distributed billions to Social Security retirees, veterans, welfare families and others (using borrowed money, if necessary). This increase was normal for recessions as more and more citizens lost their incomes and became dependent.

But the central explanation for the rising incomes reflected the fundamental sea change that was under way in the American economy, rearranging basic patterns. The increase in per capita income was attributable not to wages but to interest. Over the three years since the Federal Reserve had launched its anti-inflation initiative in 1979, there had been an explosive surge in the income families derived from interest payments on their financial assets. The contrast in economic fortunes was stark: industrial production shrank from its 1979 peak by nearly 12 percent, while personal income from interest grew by 67 percent. The real economy was languishing and finance was flourishing.

The increase in interest rates after 1979 produced $148 billion in additional income in 1982 for those who owned financial assets. Naturally, the money was distributed in a regressive fashion—disproportionately benefiting upper-income families since they were the ones who owned the most in financial assets. It was not simply financial intermediaries like the commercial banks that profited in recession, but wealth holders generally, most especially the 10 percent of American families that owned 86 percent of the net financial wealth.

The shifting composition of personal incomes produced an odd juncture for the political economy. If one viewed the Federal Reserve’s policy of high interest rates as an implicit government program for redistributing incomes, its magnitude by 1982 was approximately as great as all of the government’s other income-transfer programs combined, the redistribution of income that was explicit and controversial. The vast flow of money distributed to various beneficiaries through Social Security, veterans’ pensions, welfare and the rest came to $374 billion, now about the same as the income distributed to wealth holders through the high interest rates, $366 billion. Interest payments reached a record share of the nation’s personal income in 1982, more than 14 percent, almost doubled from ten years before.

The billions in government checks sent to the poor or the elderly or other beneficiaries generated an endless social debate over whether the recipients truly deserved the money. No questions were raised, however, about the windfall in interest income for the well-to-do, though much of this vast redistribution was also attributable to government policy. Interest income was considered the just entitlement of capital, the reward that was due, under any circumstances, to industrious citizens who had managed to store up financial assets.

The wealth holders, whether they were elderly retirees with modest savings or millionaires with vast accumulations, might claim there was a rough sort of justice in their good fortune. For many years, after all, they were the virtuous “savers” who had lost while debtors had profited at their expense. The federal government had effectively “robbed” them by permitting price inflation. The Federal Reserve, inadvertently or otherwise, had reduced the value of their financial assets by permitting the dollar to become cheapened. Now it was their turn to be made whole.

This moral logic demonstrated the triumph of money over life. In the hierarchy of shared cultural values and political goals, the abstraction of money values was given greater rank than tangible needs of flesh and spirit, just as Veblen had said. The dense web of conflicting social interests would, in effect, be reconciled by an exercise in bookkeeping—justice would be redressed by balancing the ledger of money values. One side would lose and the other would gain, but equity would be served by restoring stable money.

This required implicitly a moral choice of abstraction over tangible reality, a preference that was revealed when one compared the nature of the losses suffered by victims on either side of the equation. What exactly did an investor lose from the inflation that eroded his wealth? In some instances, there was real loss. An elderly couple who depended on interest income from savings to maintain their living standard might experience genuine sacrifices because of price inflation.

Since their asset income purchased less in real goods, they had to give up some things.

More typically, however, wealth holders simply realized less growth than they expected from their accumulated wealth. During inflation, the real return on their financial assets was smaller than they anticipated or, for limited periods of time, even negative. This did not change their material circumstances in any way. With few exceptions, they did not lose their livelihoods or their homes or find themselves unable to buy food and clothing for their families. Their loss amounted to this: their financial wealth did not breed still more wealth as fast as it would have if money’s value had been stable. Once money was restored to a stable value, they would again enjoy the full prerogative of capital. They would become steadily, reliably wealthier.

On the other side of the balance sheet, the human distress was not an abstraction. The losers from disinflation did include profiteers, speculators who had gambled on inflating prices by buying farmland or antiques or commodity futures, and their loss was strictly financial. For the most part, however, the victims of the liquidation process experienced tangible privation—the loss of family livelihoods, of homes and businesses and farms—that included incalculable damage to what Veblen called “the tenuous things of the human spirit.” It was the general willingness to subordinate these human losses, including life itself, to the goal of sound money that demonstrated the society’s true values.

Barbaric as it might seem, people did actually lose their lives so that money could be made sound again. The human casualties from a major economic contraction were comparable in number to the mortalities of a colonial war. These deadly effects were documented by Dr. M. Harvey Brenner of Johns Hopkins University, who made a study of the impact on life and health associated with the deep recession of 1974-1975. That recession, Brenner concluded, produced a 2.3 percent increase in the nation’s normal mortality rate. It led to a 2.8 percent increase in the cardiovascular death rate, a 1.4 percent increase in deaths from cirrhosis of the liver, a 1 percent increase in the rate of suicides. In addition, he found a 6 percent increase in admissions to state mental hospitals and in total arrests.

In all, Brenner calculated, 45,900 people had died prematurely due to the swollen unemployment of 1974-1975—casualties in a liquidation that was less severe than the one unfolding in 1982.

John Zanetti, a steelworkers’ union official at the Pullman Standard plant in Butler, Pennsylvania, counted nine suicides among his fellow workers and he lost count of the divorces. Pullman Standard manufactured railroad freight cars, sixty cars a day, and when it closed on February 4, 1982, 2,700 steelworkers and others were displaced, permanently as it turned out.

One guy who shot himself lost his job when the plant closed and his wife was a nurse, making about $7 an hour, I guess, and they had bought a new home [Zanetti said]. They were living high on the hog because, together, they were making $17—$18—$19 an hour—about $35,000 a year. But when he lost his job, he couldn’t afford the house payments. His wife didn’t want to give up the house and they separated. They were living apart when he shot himself.

At the union office, Zanetti took a phone call from an unemployed steelworker who asked if his wife would still receive insurance benefits in the event his death was a suicide. “I talked to him, another union official talked to him,” Zanetti said. “We called his brother who went over and talked him out of it. I talked to him, but I’m not a counselor. You can’t put yourself in their shoes. I know what it’s like, but still.”8

In Abilene, Texas, Joan Benigno saw the victims downstream—the thousands of unemployed workers and their families who fled to the Southwest in search of work.

We averaged two or three suicides’ calls a day [said Benigno, director of Abilene’s mental-health association!. Sometimes, they were in progress when they called. One woman, she was thirty-two and from Pennsylvania, said to me, “I’m sitting here with the phone in one hand and a gun in the other. Give me one reason why I shouldn’t kill myself.”

About 80 percent of the callers were from Pennsylvania, Michigan, Ohio, Illinois, that region. One guy, he was twenty-one or twenty-two, was out on the Interstate. He threw himself in front of a tractor-trailer. He’s never been identified. . . . They become hopeless. They say you have to hit bottom before you come back, but I don’t know if these people will ever come back.9

Peter Sternlight, operating manager of the Open Market Desk, the man who bought and sold bonds every day for the Federal Reserve System, worried sometimes about what the Fed was doing to the American people. Sternlight lived in Brooklyn, and on weekends, he took long bicycle rides through the borough, including blighted sections like Bedford-Stuyvesant where the poverty was so visible.

It can bother me [Sternlight acknowledged!. I ride my bike through these neighborhoods on Sundays and I ask myself: “What the hell are we doing to these areas?” Then I think, “Oh, well, they probably wouldn’t be going much better off if we had a much more stimulative monetary policy. They’ll probably be better off in the long run if we do something about inflation.” But I continue to be bothered.

The vice chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, Frederick Schultz, felt similar anxieties when he visited at home in Jacksonville, Florida. “One of my good friends was an auto dealer who went under,” he said. “I’d go home and see him somewhere and he’d say, ‘Schultz, for godsakes, come home.’ He wanted me to come home so I would stop doing what I was doing in Washington. It was a little painful for both of us and we didn’t talk about it.”

The Federal Reserve governors all encountered evidence of the intense public distress that was flowing from their policy decisions and they dealt with these pressures in different ways. “I drink more,” one governor explained. His half-twisted smile suggested that he was not joking.

Did I get sweaty palms? Did I lie awake at night? [Fred Schultz asked aloud]. The answer is I did both. I was speaking before these groups all the time, home builders and auto dealers and others. It’s not so bad when some guy gets up and yells at you, “You SOB, you’re killing us.” What really got to me was when this fellow stood up and said in a very quiet way, “Governor, I’ve been an auto dealer for thirty years, worked hard to build up that business. Next week, I am closing my doors.” Then he sat down. That really gets to you.

Governor Lyle Gramley, who had been a senior Fed staff official for many years, realized it was different to be a governor, casting a vote. “It was a very sobering experience for me,” he said, “to realize that what I do and decide has horrendous effects on the lives of millions of people.” Gramley, like others on the Board of Governors, encountered old friends who were outright hostile to him. “But that’s part of the game,” Gramley said stoically. “More often, it is teasing.”

“What you try to do,” said E. Gerald Corrigan, president of the Minneapolis Fed, “is satisfy yourself that, difficult as it may be, the alternative would be far worse. Permitting the instabilities to go on would be the worst thing you could do.”

That was the common rationale, repeated by Paul Volcker and the others throughout the liquidation. If inflation was finally brought under control, they promised, then everyone would be better off, including those people who were now suffering. The economy, they said, would be able to achieve higher real growth and sustain its expansion longer without inflation. Workers might get smaller nominal pay raises, but without the constantly rising prices, their real wage gains would be larger. Perhaps most important, long-term capital investment would become more rational and reliable. That would enable the nation to improve its basic productivity—more real output per investment of labor and capital. Rising productivity created the surplus wealth and income that could be distributed among all the players. The human suffering, they reasoned, would be morally justified once these positive results came to pass.

“You just have to tell yourself,” Volcker said, “that somehow it’s in the larger interest of the country—and even of these people—to get this straightened out.”

In Kentucky, the home builders’ association printed up “wanted” posters with photos of the seven governors—“for premeditated and calculated cold-blooded murder of millions of small businesses.”10 Three national trade associations—realtors, home builders and auto dealers—joined forces in a silent protest, mailing hundreds of keys to the Federal Reserve Board, representing unbuilt houses and unsold cars. Lapel stickers in the shape of a hangman’s noose announced: “Hang tall, Paul.”

Volcker reluctantly agreed to a permanent bodyguard after a distraught man entered the Fed with a sawed-off shotgun, a revolver and a knife. Guards stopped the man just outside the boardroom where the governors were meeting. His plan was to take the governors hostage and force the news media to focus on what the Federal Reserve was doing to the country.11

“The public criticism was really abusive,” an associate of Volcker’s said. “It was hard on him. There were a number of personal threats, presumably from kooks, but all of it takes its toll.”

Whatever their personal anguish, the Federal Reserve governors were also essentially insulated. They did not personally confront the worst of it; the uglier aspects did not intrude on their official deliberations. Policy discussions inside the FOMC, as political scientist John T. Woolley noted, were rigorously focused on “puzzle-solving” questions—the complex technical issues of money hydraulics. “Questions having to do with income distribution, other inequalities, the appropriate direction of future industrial development and so forth are put aside,” Woolley observed.12

“I don’t think we are very much driven by the question of equity, other than in the broad sense,” Governor Partee acknowledged. “We would not back off from an interest rate because we thought there were major inequities involved.”

Among themselves, the policy makers talked like financial engineers, working out the abstract problems of money demand and velocity and reserve control. The narrow focus allowed them to distance themselves from the messy reality outside the boardroom. It was considered bad taste to dwell on stories of personal tragedy. Anthony Solomon of the New York Fed said matter-of-factly:

Once in a while you get a rational letter. The guy’s in trouble, it evokes sympathies. Sometimes, the letters are stupid or obscene. But we are sheltered. We are meeting mostly with business people, financial people, government officials, foreign leaders and a little bit with labor leaders. It isn’t as though we run into a large number of people who lost their jobs or their car dealerships.

Inside the embattled Fed, the deep contraction produced a comradely elan, a spirit of we-are-all-in-this-together. The angry home builders who had deluged the Fed with two-by-fours, symbols of the collapsed housing industry, would have been aghast to learn that many Fed officials kept the blocks of wood prominently displayed on their desks and showed them off to visitors—like souvenirs of battle. Volcker himself displayed with a smile a huge, brightly painted sledgehammer that was sent to him by citizens of Tennessee to “drive down interest rates.”

The Federal Reserve was ruled, after all, by the masculine mystique. This was not simply because nearly all of its senior officers were men. The very purpose of the central bank was anchored in a sense of manly duty: the obligation to make hard and unpopular choices, unswayed by the passions of the crowd. One was expected to exercise a cool rationality. To be strong and stoical in the face of public abuse. To avoid the emotionalism that might contaminate judgment or reveal weakness. Paul Volcker, it was said by a close friend, felt the pressures of social distress as strongly as anyone else, but it would be out of character for him to talk about it. “That would seem like he was appealing to your sympathy,” the friend explained. “It would look soft.”

The governors’ self-conscious “toughness” was expressed most bluntly by Henry Wallich, a courtly gentleman who, nonetheless, took considerable pride in his own willingness to make harsh decisions. “Had one known what the cost of disinflation would be,” Wallich said, “it would not be an easy decision to make. But obviously it was worth it—temporary pain for lasting benefits. It’s a question of whether you have the guts to take the pain.”

Both to his colleagues and to the public, Paul Volcker seemed the very embodiment of this masculine strength and courage. He had “guts.” As the recession dragged on, deepening its destruction, the Fed chairman loomed larger and larger in the popular consciousness —an awesome figure, stolid and unbending and mysteriously knowledgeable. He seemed admirably indifferent to the trivial politics surrounding him in Washington, ominously indifferent to the cries of human pain from ordinary citizens. U.S. News & World Report moved Volcker from sixth to second place, right behind the President, in its annual survey of influentials, “Who Runs America?”13 People magazine chronicled his celebrity status. Volcker was photographed at home, sprawled in an armchair, doing a crossword puzzle and smoking his long cigar.14

Volcker’s character—the strong, silent type—became the public symbol for the wrenching discipline being imposed on the American economy. He was physically imposing, a head taller than most everyone else, including the President. He spoke in a brooding Germanic manner that was intimidating by itself. His intellectual self-confidence was daunting and so were his silences.

On television, appearing before hostile congressional committees, the Fed chairman pulled on his cigar and pouted his lips at a skeptical angle, while the angry congressmen accused him of heedlessly wrecking lives and businesses. Wreathed in cigar smoke, Volcker would shake his head wearily and dismiss every accusation as simplistic. The hostile questions were deflected with rambling, evasive answers that conceded nothing and only added to the politicians’ frustrations.

“Paul was worried by the fact that so many groups were rising in righteous wrath,” Fred Schultz said. “He’s not insensitive. But he is a tough guy.”

In the public drama, Volcker was like the stern father, administering punishment to errant children. When the children whined or resisted, he would patiently explain that, for reasons they perhaps did not fully comprehend, this would be good for them in the long run. His manner was aloof. His perseverance seemed to tower heroically above weaker souls around him. Twenty years earlier, Congressman Wright Patman had complained that the Federal Reserve’s attitude was “Papa knows best.” Volcker filled the same role. He was the father imposing discipline on the family.

The image was more than a metaphor. Many monetary economists actually saw the Federal Reserve in those terms, as the parent of us all, the responsible adult who must occasionally punish the children by inflicting pain. Donald J. Mullineaux, a former senior vice president of the Philadelphia Fed, made the point explicit in a scholarly essay on how the Federal Reserve controlled the economy: “Suppose the central bank announces a target of zero inflation to be achieved through strict control of the money supply. If inflation rises to 5 percent (the economy misbehaves), the central bank needs to slow the growth of the money supply (administer a spanking). But a slowdown in money growth is likely to produce a temporary rise in unemployment (pain).”15

Volcker’s private character was evidently not that different from his public one. His daughter, Janice, once described a similar distance in her father’s personal manner at home: “You’ll be talking to him, but he’ll sit there reading a book. And you know he hears what you’re saying, but he’s not acknowledging it.” As a small boy in kindergarten, Paul did not talk much either, his mother told an interviewer from Newsweek. “His father and I got a report from school complaining that he didn’t take part in group discussions—and he hasn’t taken part in group discussions in the family since,” she said, laughing. Volcker’s own recollections of childhood centered on discipline. “My story,” he told Newsweek, “is that [my sisters] were so conscious of not wanting to spoil me that they were too successful in leaning over backward in the other direction.”

As an adult, Volcker disciplined himself. “At the Fed,” People magazine reported, “Volcker has applied the same strictures to the U.S. economy that he applies to his personal life.” The popular accounts of the chairman all focused on this aspect of the man—his frugal life-style. In private and in public speeches, Volcker sometimes ruminated on the popular obsession with getting rich, a desire that was especially popular in Wall Street. “What’s the subject of life—to get rich?” he once said. “All of those fellows out there getting rich might be dancing around the real subject of life.”16 In his need for order and control over things, Volcker resembled the classic Freudian character type, the anal personality, but there was this essential difference—Volcker had no interest whatever in accumulating “filthy lucre.”

It was a tantalizing irony: the monastic central banker, the spartan father, dedicated to restoring sound money, yet oblivious to accumulating wealth and worldly pleasures for himself. The image lent dramatic depth to Volcker’s public persona, but the often-expressed solicitude for his personal sacrifices was misplaced. Volcker was richly compensated for his work. At any time, it was true, he could have left his $75,000-a-year government job for a more lucrative career in private finance, earning many times more than his Fed salary. But Volcker was rewarded in a different coin, the one that mattered most to him. Instead of money, he got power. He got to control things. He was the presiding patriarch for the American economy and, by extension, the world’s. No million-dollar salary in Wall Street could buy that for him.

And he had “guts.” Even those who detested the Federal Reserve chairman, who objected most strenuously to the stringent regimen he was imposing on the nation, were compelled to concede that much. In early 1982, with public anger rising rapidly, Volcker agreed to address the annual convention of the National Association of Home Builders in Las Vegas. The audience was as hostile as any he could confront, but Volcker did not apologize for their agonies or even promise them speedy relief.

We would all like to see recovery begin [Volcker said to the home builders]. But even more crucial than the precise timing of that recovery is that growth be sustainable for years ahead. It is in that context that I am convinced we cannot let up now in our anti-inflation effort. . . . The pain we have suffered would have been for naught—and we would only be putting off until some later time an even more painful day of reckoning.17

Like it or not, the home builders gave Volcker’s uncompromising message a standing ovation.

Nancy Teeters, almost alone, resisted. Month after month, as the economy spiraled downward, she repeatedly urged her colleagues to back off. The largest corporations were shutting down more and more of their production. As loan failures accumulated, the financial sector itself was threatened with crisis. The Fed’s single-mindedness, she warned, was inflicting deep wounds that would not soon be healed.

“I gave the FOMC a lecture,” Teeters said. “I told them: ‘You are pulling the financial fabric of this country so tight that it’s going to rip. You should understand that once you tear a piece of fabric, it’s very difficult, almost impossible, to put it back together again.’”

The metaphor, she remarked caustically afterward, was one that only a woman might use. “None of these guys has ever sewn anything in his life,” Teeters said.

But the metaphor hinted at much deeper differences—a moral argument over justice itself. Teeters thought the wholesale destruction of innocents was not simply wrong but largely unnecessary and ultimately dangerous for the society. The other governors thought it was required, unpleasant but therapeutic. Though never stated so directly, they were really arguing about the process of liquidation itself. Was it truly in the society’s interest—or morally defensible—to inflict such broad damage when there were other, less brutal ways to restore economic stability? What were the unmeasurable costs of severing so many human relationships at random, the intricate, continuous web of social and economic connections that people and institutions depended upon? Once destroyed, the web might be irreparably lost.

In broad terms, this was an ancient argument over how a society arrived at its sense of justice, an argument made freshly relevant by contemporary feminist critics who were challenging the male-dominated institutions in the society. The feminist critique was aimed in part at the masculine moral perspective, a mind-set that seemed narrow and mechanical, driven by abstract formulations that excluded social complexities and was insufficiently attentive to human loss. When Harvard psychologist Carol Gilligan explored these gender-related moral differences in her study, In a Different Voice, she used the same metaphor that Nancy Teeters had used before the Federal Open Market Committee. Women, Gilligan wrote, will usually seek to avoid “the fracture of human relationships that must be mended with its own thread.”

The question of “social fabric” was, practically speaking, not an admissible argument at the private meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee. It was not the way its members looked at things, and Teeters’s repeated warnings were politely dismissed. She continued to object anyway, month after month. If the Federal Reserve did not swiftly ease up, it might lead to a general unraveling of the financial system and a crisis of much larger dimensions. Some of the men began to share her worries, but they declined to vote with her against the chairman.

It was very difficult for me philosophically to run up the unemployment rate [Teeters said]. It was perfectly obvious to me we didn’t need to put interest rates up that high. We couldn’t do it without a recession, but recession is still a difficult decision to make, no matter how you dress it up. People get unemployed. People get hurt. All sorts of nasty things can happen if it gets out of hand.

As a successful woman in a profession still dominated by men, Teeters was fully aware of the stereotypes that attached to women who attained positions of power. Women might be dismissed as “soft.” Men accused them of confusing emotion with facts. Knowing this, she kept raising her voice anyway. Furthermore, Teeters freely acknowledged what many of her male colleagues would never be willing to admit—the deteriorating economy frightened her. “I was scared and so was everybody else,” she said. “That’s what it came down to.”

Inside the temple, Nancy Teeters was always something of an outsider—a liberal Democrat and also a woman, but more than that a governor who persisted in challenging premises that others assumed were beyond argument. “Nancy never really took the veil,” said a senior official on the Federal Reserve Board staff. Another FOMC officer described the distance between Teeters and her colleagues: “She never said ‘we.’ She always addressed the other committee members as ‘you.’ ‘If YOU do this, you’re going to have the worst unemployment.’ ‘If YOU make this decision, it will guarantee a long recession.’ She was very consciously the outsider.”

Relations were cordial and correct, but others were increasingly annoyed by her persistence. “She was sounding the alarm about unemployment in a way that irritates people,” a senior staff officer said. “Of course they were humane and they were concerned about unemployment, but they didn’t need anyone lecturing them on that. It was her tone, her mode of argument.”

The irony, of course, was that nothing Teeters said inside the boardroom would have rankled the general public or most public officials outside the Fed. Her position could be described in the terms of the feminine moral perspective, but the values themselves were widely shared among men and women, both in and out of public life. Teeters was trying to make the case for considerations that were broader than the Federal Reserve’s narrow preoccupation with money’s value. She was invoking the claims of what Veblen called “the tenuous things of the human spirit . . . the gross material needs of human life.”

Given its own institutional values, it was not surprising that the Federal Reserve turned away from these claims in annoyance, for the Federal Reserve was a masculine institution. When Teeters became the first woman on the Board of Governors, in 1978, she found two women in senior-grade positions at the Fed. When she retired six years later, there would be only thirteen. Still, the central bank’s masculinity was tied not so much to personnel but to its deepest assumptions about right and wrong.

The feminine-masculine distinctions described by Gilligan and other feminist scholars provided a key to understanding the Federal Reserve’s own mode of thinking. What was true about little boys playing games at school was also roughly true about the grown-up behavior inside the Fed boardroom. Boys were taught to believe in rules, a hard and concise form of justice that could be calculated. Girls were taught to negotiate and compromise, to avoid harsh judgments that might fracture relationships.

Observed on the playground, small boys will quarrel repeatedly over infractions of the rules, arrive at a decision, then continue the game, Gilligan explained. Girls at play argue much less and are more likely to change the rules to make everyone happy—or even abandon the game if the dispute seems to threaten friendships. Boys, Gilligan wrote, become “increasingly fascinated with the legal elaboration of rules and the development of fair procedures for adjudicating conflicts.” Girls, on the other hand, “are more tolerant in their attitudes toward rules, more willing to make exceptions and more easily reconciled to innovations.”

This difference, one could say, was approximately parallel to what divided Teeters from her colleagues at the Fed. She was willing to abandon the arbitrary money “rules” that the Federal Reserve was following rather than allow even greater destruction to unfold. For her, the losses were weighing far more heavily than the abstract consistency. She was willing to innovate, to change the rules rather than accept continuing social disintegration.

The other governors could not easily entertain such a trade-off. They sought the “right” decision by deliberating over the economic abstractions of the money formulas. In Henry Wallich’s phrase, they were supposed to “have the guts to take the pain.” Teeters’s dissents kept reminding everyone that it was not they who would take the “pain,” but defenseless others. Naturally, this rankled.

The origin of gender differences was woven deeply in everyone’s childhood experience—boys taught to separate from their mothers in order to attain a mature masculine identity, girls learning from their mothers’ model and assuming responsibility for maintaining unbroken personal attachments in the family. As a result, males tend to have difficulty with relationships and females with a sense of self.

The moral implications were sketched more clearly in Gilligan’s example of clinical studies that asked grade-school boys and girls to solve hypothetical dilemmas. If an impoverished man stole medicine to heal his sick wife, should he be punished as a thief? The boys would weigh good and evil and arrive at a straightforward verdict by “logical deduction.” The girls attempted to devise ameliorative solutions in which all the parties settled the issue by talking it out among themselves and compromising. In a similar vein, Volcker and the majority would not consider themselves “wrong” in any sense so long as they adhered conscientiously to the economic rules of their system. In the real world, as Nancy Teeters kept pointing out, things were getting dangerously frayed, but the others found refuge from her evidence by sticking to their numbers (while they resented her constant appeals to human sympathy).

In the male-dominated orthodoxy, particularly in economics, the feminine was dismissed as an emotional evasion of hard facts. Yet it was the masculine approach itself that was a form of evasion—a way to block out the complex social realities by focusing solely on a system of mathematical abstractions. As Gilligan and others have suggested, the social ideal should be not to embrace one perspective or the other but to reconcile the two, to seek balance in the way people think about such things, but also in the way public institutions define social justice.

“Sensitivity to the needs of others and the assumption of responsibility for taking care lead women to attend to voices other than their own and to include in their judgment other points of view.” This supposed weakness was actually their moral strength—a mediating capacity that could reach beyond the hard-edged adjudications of the masculine. The feminine vision blurred the clear, sharp outlines of justice, and that enriched and deepened the idea of what justice required.

Quite apart from Nancy Teeters and her losing arguments inside the Fed, the feminine-masculine differences framed the moral question that could be asked of the entire process of government-managed liquidation. If they thought about it at all, people could sense easily enough that there was something wrong about a system that, in effect, selected certain victims to serve as the scapegoats for everyone else’s benefit. The moral problem became even more obvious when the sacrificial victims were largely chosen from among the weak and powerless.

What was missing from the economics of liquidation—and from the general political debate—was the moral test described by the feminine perspective, the obligation to tend the broader human relationships, the honoring of family responsibilities, the idea of a valuable fabric that must be preserved. If those values were to prevail or were even in rough balance with the masculine, the government would not likely engineer the kind of selective destruction that the Federal Reserve was imposing. It might have to be more patient about restoring stable money values, giving people more time to adjust. It might have to take up other methods of restraint—direct or indirect controls on credit and prices, for instance—that did not require abrupt and massive suffering by a hapless minority but instead spread the sacrifice more gradually and more fairly across the entire society. Most citizens probably assumed there were no alternatives to the destruction because the alternatives were almost never discussed in politics and seldom studied by economists. The ritual of liquidation, brutal as it was, conveyed a bracing sense of manly struggle, and many even found it satisfying. The numbers were hard and certain. The counterclaims were perceived as soft and tenuous.18

The Bible taught the same moral lesson about the conflict between abstract justice and human life. Confronted with two women who both claimed a baby as their own, King Solomon decreed a just solution— the baby would be cut in half and each mother would be given her share. The true mother, as Solomon expected, quickly revealed herself by renouncing her claim to the child. She would not subordinate the baby’s life to the logic of the law. “The blind willingness to sacrifice people to truth,” Gilligan wrote, . . has always been the danger of an ethics abstracted from life.”

That was the essence of Nancy Teeters’ complaint—that the Federal Reserve was sacrificing people to abstract “truth.” If her repeated dissents sounded “soft” to some of her colleagues, the old sexual stereotypes were actually reversed in the behavior of the Federal Open Market Committee. Several other governors, after all, shared Teeters’ alarm about the deteriorating economy, but none of these men felt sufficiently alarmed—or strong-willed—to vote with her against Paul Volcker. Even the chairman’s own personal courage was more ambiguous than it seemed. In public, he looked heroically steadfast. In private, he worried and hesitated, unable to bring himself to abandon his operating system even though he knew it was flawed. Volcker seemed brave enough in his willingness to stare down the public’s complaints. He was not so brave about staring down Wall Street.

Standing alone—opposing Paul Volcker—was not the “soft” thing to do. It took “guts” for Nancy Teeters to vote against the chairman and his majority again and again, knowing she would lose. “It’s tough, very tough,” Teeters said. “That’s why a lot of people don’t like to do it. Once Paul has a consensus, people are reluctant to vote against him.”

Furthermore, the fact that Nancy Teeters was alone, that she continued to lose the arguments, did not mean that she was wrong. The financial fabric was stretched tight, as she said. In time, as she warned, it would begin to tear.19

Senator Kennedy: What is your answer to those who say that the Fed is embarked on a scorched-earth policy with regards to the American economy? Millions of young potential home buyers feel the burden. Millions who are out of work feel it. Millions of small-business men and women feel it. Millions of farmers feel it.

Mr. Volcker: Let me say, first of all—

Senator Kennedy: Is this your policy or is it the Reagan policy?

Mr. Volcker: I can only speak for our policy authoritatively. Let me say that monetary policy is an important instrument, but it’s only one instrument of economic activity.

$$$

Senator Hawkins: Chairman Volcker, if I were President, I’d have you up for a visit every Monday and we’d have fireside chats or maybe some woodside chats. I know you like to be independent, Mr. Volcker, because we’ve had this conversation before. You reiterated today that you feel strongly that the Fed should be independent of the Congress because monetary policy is complicated. Yet we don’t leave war to the generals over at the Pentagon although that’s a complicated subject too.

Mr. Volcker: Congress has the authority over the Federal Reserve. It’s a question of the degree to which they’re going to exercise it.

Senator Riegle: I think the time has come where stubbornness in one quarter ought not to just be matched by equivalent stubbornness in another quarter. ... I think the Fed has an obligation in its own right to face up to the damage caused by the high-interest-rate policy.

Mr. Volcker: ... I do not think the Federal Reserve is being stubborn in this area. I think we have a very difficult problem. I would be delighted to see interest rates decline, obviously, but you attribute—

Senator Riegle: You do have something to do with that. I mean, in all honesty, it is not as if you are a helpless bystander.

Mr. Volcker: It is perhaps not quite as simple as you imply, senator.

Representative Reuss: The next subject has to do with the predictions that some are making that, in view of the wretched state of our economic and financial arrangements, there could lie ahead real distress for certain large financial institutions—banks and brokerages. Do you see any peril of that ahead?

Mr. Volcker: Let me answer that question in general terms, Mr. Chairman. You refer to the “wretched” state of the economy and, in an immediate sense, one can recognize that description.

Representative Reuss: Ten million unemployed is my wretchedness index.

Mr. Volcker: Exactly. There’s a high level of unemployment. But let me emphasize too that I think this could be a promising period.

Mr. Volcker: I think these interest rates are extraordinarily high. If, in the area of monetary policy and fiscal policy we do the right things, I don’t see any place for those interest rates to go but down.

Representative Brown: But when?

Representative Hamilton: When?

Mr. Volcker: I will not attempt to be more precise.

On Capitol Hill, the “Fed bashing” was under way in earnest. Volcker appeared regularly before numerous congressional committees, where more and more members, Republican and Democratic, liberal and conservative, took the opportunity to denounce his imperiousness or plead with him for relief. Snippets of the angry exchanges appeared on the evening news and made for good television: the vigilant congressman confronts the cold-hearted banker on behalf of suffering constituents. Volcker ducked and dodged stoically, repeating the same bromides over and over again. The most sincere and deferential inquiries elicited no more responsiveness than did the demagogic tirades.

Even some conservatives, who generally supported the Fed against liberal attacks, were concluding that Volcker had gone too far, that he must be nudged off his rigid policy. “The man has a certain majesty in his massive bearing,” Senator Lloyd Bentsen of Texas explained, “but I have never wanted majestic decisions to veto common sense.” Bentsen said his arguments were dismissed by Volcker “with courteous disdain.”20

The congressional outrage was real enough. The elected politicians were hearing lots of scary talk, not only from constituents but from respected economists. Edward E. Yardeni of E. F. Hutton predicted a 30 percent chance of a full-blown depression like the 1930s. If things did not turn around by May, he warned, the odds would go to 50-50. Liberal economists like Robert Solow of MIT thought the Fed had worked itself into a corner and would need help getting out. “They are stuck in the embarrassing position of having their finger in the dike and believing they are the country’s last hope,” Solow said.21

The elected representatives and senators were ill-equipped to assert their authority over the Federal Reserve. Only a handful of them were truly comfortable with the fundamentals of money, not to mention the complexities, and their ignorance left them especially vulnerable to Volcker’s evasions. Many of his answers were elaborate non sequiturs, cloaked in a tone of patient explanation. The infuriated members of Congress sensed they were being spun around, but they were not knowledgeable enough to penetrate the chairman’s cloud of smoke.

It’s really a master fencing with amateurs [said a dispirited staff economist from the House Banking Committee]. Each member gets only five minutes to ask questions and Volcker can filibuster or fill it up with gobbledygook. Volcker is interested in deflecting questions. The members are interested in cute thirty-second exchanges that will get them on the evening news. They want to be cute. He wants to be obtuse. Plus, most of them don’t do their homework. Members have fifteen hundred things on their minds. Volcker thinks about one thing—monetary policy.

Democratic senators, led by Robert Byrd of West Virginia, the minority floor leader, summoned Volcker to a private meeting on March 18 in an attempt to pressure him more effectively, away from the TV cameras. They urged Volcker to lower interest rates and he urged them to lower the deficits and each side wanted the other to go first. Senator Byrd, according to one participant’s notes, asked: If we cut the deficit, what would you do? That, Volcker replied, would give the Fed some room for shading of judgment. Byrd pressed for a commitment. The Fed chairman would make none.

Volcker gave the senators in private the same argument he had made so often in public: the Federal Reserve was powerless to bring down interest rates by pumping up the money supply. If the Fed increased M-l, the financial markets would react by bidding up interest rates on their own, canceling out the intended results. That’s what had occurred in January, he suggested. What Volcker left out of his explanation was the reason why the markets had reacted this way— because the Federal Reserve’s monetarist operating system told them to do so.

“Volcker just said, ‘Look, I can’t affect interest rates,’” one participant related. “The Fed absolved itself of any responsibility for the recession. It was a great smoke screen.”

Liberal Democrats felt stymied by Volcker’s argument. They could not see through it at first, not until they were coached by several independent authorities, including Edward Yardeni of E. F. Hutton and Lester Thurow of MIT. The economists explained the game of circular reality played between market perceptions and Volcker’s M-l. When M-l rose above its target, financial markets scrambled for funds and bid up interest rates, anticipating that the Fed would react by tightening. The Fed saw market rates rising in response to M-l, and in order to keep its promises to financial markets, the Fed did indeed tighten—thus ratifying their expectations. The logic formed an absurd game of mirrors but one which the Federal Reserve had the power to break—anytime it wished.

The economists assured the senators that if the Fed pumped enough new money into the banking system, then short-term interest rates would fall—no matter what the markets thought or Paul Volcker claimed. Neither investor psychology nor monetarist theory was capable of repealing the law of supply and demand. A market surplus of anything, including money, would drive down the price, including interest rates.

Senator Byrd and other frustrated Democrats decided to do more than implore and bargain. They suggested subsequently to Volcker that if he failed to act they would sponsor legislation ordering the Federal Reserve to ease its policy. Such an explicit command from Congress would effectively override the Fed’s historic independence. It was the ultimate threat.

“To whom are you accountable?” Byrd asked at one point.

“Well, the Congress created us and the Congress can uncreate us,” Volcker replied.22

The Democratic leader set about organizing a legislative assault on the central bank, a measure that would direct the Fed to take the specific policy actions needed to bring down interest rates. To make his threat credible, however, Byrd would first have to convince his own colleagues. At the outset, only about fifteen of the forty-six Democratic senators were prepared to support such a bill.

Seven decades of history told Federal Reserve officials that threatening gestures from Capitol Hill were usually not meaningful. “Congress doesn’t want to control the Fed,” Dan Brill, the former Fed research director, explained. “Neither Congress nor the President wants to take the rap for high interest rates.”23

In spring, Congress fired a mild warning shot—a resolution in generalized language commanding the Fed to re-evaluate its use of the monetary targets in light of the congressional intentions to reduce the deficits. It was an innocuous exhortation, easily ignored.

Senator Byrd, however, was gathering more and more Democratic cosponsors for his legislative weapon—and some Republican interest too. Coached by the outside economists, the Democrats drafted a viable reform measure that would give Congress genuine leverage on monetary policy and force the Federal Reserve to back off its hard position. The central bank was directed by the bill to abandon M-l and monetarism and begin doing what it used to do—to target interest rates. Furthermore, the Fed’s money regulation was to be assessed in the terms that really counted—real interest rates, the true cost of credit after inflation was discounted.

If the measure passed, the central bank would be ordered to keep real interest rates within a range reflecting historic levels—easing or tightening accordingly. If real interest rates on bank lending rose above 4 percent, say, the Fed would be compelled to ease and bring them down. If real rates went negative, the Fed would have to tighten and restore a reasonable return for capital. The immediate practical effect would be easy money. The long-term potential was a monetary policy that avoided extremes on both the upside and the downside.

The idea drew some interesting allies from among the Republicans. Representative Jack Kemp, a regular critic of Volcker’s stringent policy, indicated that he would introduce a similar measure, cosponsored by other young conservatives in the House. The odd coalition of liberals and conservatives made the threat to the Fed somewhat more plausible. Democratic reformers had never succeeded, in many years of trying, in harnessing the central bank. Perhaps with gold-standard Republicans on board, they might actually get somewhere.

But Volcker worked the Congress assiduously, cultivating friends and allies in the broad center. Neither the Republican chairman of the Senate Banking Committee, Garn of Utah, nor the ranking Democrat, Proxmire of Wisconsin, had any sympathy for the Fed-stripping legislation. The solid core of moderate-conservative members could be counted on to defend the status quo.

Howard Baker, the Senate Republican leader, continued to meet regularly with Volcker, pounding on his own impatience with the Fed’s high interest rates. Baker, nevertheless, assured the Federal Reserve chairman that he would help block any Fed-stripping legislation.

“I told Volcker flat out that I was not going to support that,” Baker said. “I thought it was bad legislation and I did not want the Fed to lose its independence. My gamble was that he would accept, at face value, my warnings that he could only go so far before the system broke.”

While Democrats tried to whip up enthusiasm for a legislative assault on Volcker, Senator Baker was trying to negotiate with him. How much more would the Congress have to package in spending cuts and tax increases in order to get the Fed to ease off on interest rates? What were his terms for a truce?

“We’re doing our damnedest and it’s going to take more,” Baker told him, “but pretty soon my troops are going to get disillusioned after spilling so much blood and seeing nothing changed on interest rates. You may be right from the theoretical side, but on the political side, you’re getting close to the edge. There’s not much more pain the system can take.”

Neither President Reagan nor Congress was prepared to come anywhere close to what Volcker wanted. They were engaged in three-sided negotiations—House and Senate and White House, Republicans and Democrats—over how much they would do to reduce the deficits. Volcker kibitzed from the sidelines, pushing Senator Baker and the others to do still more.

“Look, you can’t do what Congress won’t do,” Senator Baker told him sharply at one point. The danger, Baker added, was that the Fed’s intransigence would lead to a real political crisis. “First,” Baker said, “I will have to fight down an effort to limit the Fed’s authority. I thought I could win that fight, but I couldn’t be sure. Second, the fragile package of spending cuts and tax increases we had put together would come unraveled. No telling what would happen then, but the deficits would probably soar.”24

Volcker remained unyielding. Congress was hesitantly moving toward an unusual step—enacting a major tax increase in an election year—and dragging the reluctant President along. But Volcker would make no promises about changing his monetary policy. The hope was born among the politicians, nonetheless, that if Congress passed the tax bill, the Fed would respond by bringing down interest rates.

Congress always thinks there’s a deal [Volcker said]. There’s a strong feeling in Congress that what we do is negotiate with them. We don’t. I always try to avoid that pretext. I will be very careful in what I say. “If this happens, then that will help with conditions that may allow an easing of inflationary pressures and lower interest rates.” But then Congress says, “Aha, here’s a bargain. If we do this, the Fed will lower interest rates.” No matter how carefully I say it, Congress always tries to conclude there is a deal.

Senator Baker, much as he wished for it, had no illusions about having won any quid pro quo. “Volcker and I went through rocky times, but I never thought he made a deal with me,” Baker said. “I never claimed I had an impact on the Federal Reserve. It would be nice if I did, but I can’t claim that.”

The trend line that worried the White House, in addition to the declining economy, was Ronald Reagan’s declining popularity in the Gallup poll. The President’s approval rating was falling steadily, in inverse ratio to the rising unemployment. Nine months earlier, when the recession began, 58 percent of the American public had endorsed his performance. By the spring of 1982, Reagan’s support had fallen below 45 percent and continued downward.

The President blamed Jimmy Carter and stuck to his monetarist principles. “The answer to the recession lies in bringing interest rates down,” Reagan told a national television audience on April 3. “To do that, a signal must be sent that, while the political process always requires some compromises, government this time intends to stay the course. ...”

But some of the President’s senior political advisers were ready to change course, the sooner, the better. They were increasingly skeptical of the confident predictions from the Administration’s monetarist economists. The recovery the economists had promised for spring not only didn’t happen, the contraction was clearly getting worse—six months before the congressional elections. James Baker, the chief of staff, expressed his frustration with Paul Volcker by complaining to colleagues: “How can he keep this misery going on so long?”

But it wasn’t entirely clear to James Baker and other White House officials what, if anything, they could do to turn things around. They remained preoccupied with the deficit issue, the problem they had created in 1981, and were less intense about the Fed’s tight money.

Treasury Deputy Assistant Secretary Manuel Johnson attended one White House meeting and was struck by the lopsided focus. “The meeting was all gloom-and-doom talk about the need to cut the deficits —and no mention of monetary policy,” Johnson said. “When I got upset that this was so one-sided, I was told this is the only way we were going to get spending cuts. The whole focus was, we’re not ever going to get out of this recession until we reduce the deficits.”

Johnson and other supply siders at Treasury were urging the White House to take a forceful public position in favor of an easier monetary policy at the Fed, but they were frustrated. “Every time we tried to formulate a position on monetary policy, the word came back from the White House that monetary policy is too complicated, too technical to explain,” Johnson said. “The public doesn’t understand this and the financial markets will get all upset if we talk about it.”

The White House staff itself was scattered in all directions on the crucial policy question—what to say to Paul Volcker. Some made the same pitch that Volcker heard on Capitol Hill: give us lower interest rates and we will reduce the deficits. The Administration’s monetarists, ever suspicious of Fed intentions, continued to scold the central bank and warn against any deviations from the correct path for M-l. Others like budget director David Stockman were privately encouraging Volcker to hang tough. “Stockman was egging Volcker on,” one Administration official said. “He was telling him to screw the Administration, really put it to them and force them to deal with the deficits.” Lawrence Kudlow of OMB said:

It was hilarious. All the major players tried to cut their own deals with Volcker. Stockman would have lunch with him. Don Regan would breakfast with him alone. Weidenbaum would meet with him. In that environment, it’s almost like Volcker taking an opinion poll of what the Administration wanted. He learned to filter out the noise and figure out what the consensus was. I’m not saying he would go along with it, but he might go halfway if it was reasonable.

The Federal Reserve chairman kept the pressure on the White House, just as he did on Capitol Hill. The Fed could not possibly move, he insisted, until Congress first acted on reducing the fiscal imbalance. Congressional leaders and the White House, with the President’s acquiescence, were approaching a consensus on a substantial tax measure that would raise $100 billion in added revenue over five years, enough to keep the future deficits from rising to a range of $250 to $300 billion. But passage of the tax bill was far from certain.

“Volcker was telling everyone, ‘If you give us some relief on the deficits, it will take the pressure off,’” Stockman said. “ ‘Our hands are tied unless you give us some relief on the fiscal side. We’ve got to have some room to move.’”

Chief of Staff James Baker and Edwin Meese, the two most important political advisers, lost patience with Volcker’s line. The White House was putting full muscle into getting a huge tax bill enacted, yet Volcker acted as though he had no obligation to help out.

“Baker and Meese were running around saying, ‘We’ve got to get control of the Fed,’” one Administration official said. “The message they sent to Volcker was: ‘We promise to be good boys on the deficits. So won’t you please loosen?’ The messages weren’t that meaningful because he didn’t believe us. Volcker would say to us: ‘I’ll see you at the signing ceremony.’”

Behind its public facade, the Federal Reserve’s self-confidence was shaken. The recovery did not materialize in the spring, as Fed economists had predicted. Instead of bottoming out, the economy seemed to be sinking lower and the damage was spreading rapidly.

At the end of March, the Fed’s staff economists had again assured the policy makers that a moderate recovery would be under way soon, but a number of members on the Federal Open Market Committee were no longer buying that forecast. They predicted the opposite— “continuing deterioration in both agriculture and non-agricultural industries and regions.”

At the White House, Lawrence Kudlow, who had confidently predicted a turnaround by April, was now not so sure.

At the bottom of a recession, interest rates are much too high [Kudlow reported to his White House colleagues]. Only a year or two ago, present interest-rate levels would have been record highs. With interest rates at or near record levels for over three years, business firms have been unable to secure long-term financing at acceptable rates. Consequently, firms have been forced to rely on bank loans and other forms of short-term debt to meet cash flow and working capital needs. The result has been an unprecedented deterioration in corporate balance sheets.25

International Harvester, one of the famous old names of American manufacturing, was a spectacular example of the deterioration. Harvester’s sales of tractors, combines, trucks and other heavy farm equipment fell by 31 percent during 1982 and it was compelled to cut its work force worldwide by twenty-two thousand employees. Nevertheless, the Chicago-based company was losing money faster and faster—a staggering $822 million that year. It sold off two divisions to raise cash, it borrowed heavily and it pleaded with its bankers.

A smaller corporation would doubtless have gone under at that point, but Harvester was too big to fail. It owed banks and other lenders $2.2 billion. The company’s two hundred creditors, including the leading banks of the Midwest, agreed to defer $200 million in interest payments and to keep lending. The bankers took stock in exchange for the debt and hoped that the company would somehow, someday work its way back to profitability. Over the next few years, International Harvester would survive, but barely. A company with ninety-eight thousand employees in 1979 shrank to one with fifteen thousand by 1985. Agriculture did not recover and the market for tractors and combines never did revive. Harvester would finally abandon the business line that Cyrus McCormick had started in the 1830s, the manufacture of farm equipment, and change its name to Navistar International, a maker of trucks.26

At the Federal Reserve, the uncertainties were uncomfortably close to home. The assumptions that had led the Federal Open Market Committee to tighten the money supply again in early February were clearly askew. The surge of M-l growth in December and January did not presage a pickup in economic activity, as some of the governors had theorized. The opposite was now occurring—industrial production was falling steadily toward a new low. The quantity of money the Fed had supplied to the banking system ought to have been ample to permit economic recovery. Clearly, it wasn’t. Judging from the extraordinary level of interest rates, the Fed was still holding very tight. What was wrong with money?

“The economy was spiraling downward,” Governor Nancy Teeters said, “and the theories were falling apart on us.”

The theory that was falling apart was Milton Friedman’s—and, by adoption, Paul Volcker’s. The new problem with M-l was more profound than the confusion of money definitions that the policy makers had encountered and tried to compensate for at previous junctures. Money was now slowing down in circulation—losing velocity, in technical terms—as the money supply turned over in different transactions in the private economy at a declining pace. The slowing velocity disrupted all the standard monetary equations. It meant that a given quantity of M-l could not possibly produce the level of economic activity expected from it. Indeed, it meant that the money supply was effectively much tighter than the Fed had intended.

Money was slowing down mainly because people were scared. They were holding on to it longer than normal. Under siege, millions of players in the private economy, families and businesses, were storing larger balances in their checking accounts, particularly in the interestbearing NOW accounts, but they weren’t spending their money so quickly. Everyone hesitated, and as the New York Fed put it, everyone felt the “strong precautionary demand for liquidity in the highly uncertain economic and financial climate.”

When money velocity departed from the normal expectations, then the Fed’s basic calculations—the equations by which it determined the pace for the economy—were rendered inoperable. If a dollar turned over six times in the course of the year, it would produce $6 in nominal GNP. But if the same dollar, for unanticipated reasons, turned over only five times, there would be only $5 in resulting economic activity—a gross shortfall when it was multiplied by the entire money supply.

Though unrecognized at first, that was roughly what began happening to the American economy—and to the economic regulators at the Federal Reserve. In the first quarter of 1982, the Fed had supplied about $450 billion in M-l, the money available for immediate transactions. To illustrate, if $450 billion in M-l was multiplied by a velocity of six, it would yield $2.7 trillion in nominal GNP. If the rate of velocity fell to 5.5, however, the same money supply would lead to economic activity of less than $2.5 trillion—a staggering loss that no one had intended.

M-l was a reliable measure, in other words, only if velocity followed its predicted trend line. If people abruptly changed their spending and money-handling habits, for whatever reasons, then velocity changed unexpectedly and M-l became grossly misleading. The government, including the Federal Reserve, could do nothing to control this wild card in the economics of money. People were not, after all, compelled to circulate their money at a prescribed speed.

Velocity was the Achilles’ heel in Friedman’s theory—the uncontrollable variable that could throw his confident prescriptions about money totally off track. Nor was this insight especially new. For years, the critics of monetarism (including those at the Fed) had pointed out that Friedman was assigning a constancy to money relationships that did not, in fact, exist. The alluring simplicity of Friedman’s doctrine —control M-l and forget about everything else—was also its central fallacy. Except now M-l’s reliability was more than a theory for debate among economists. The Federal Reserve was relying on the same fallacy to regulate the entire economy.

The actual divergence of M-l’s velocity was not as dramatic as the simplified example, but it was still unprecedented in modern experience. In the first quarter of 1982, M-l grew in size by 10.6 percent, but M-l’s velocity declined by 10.8 percent—effectively canceling the increase in the money supply. Back in January, when the financial markets and the White House and the Federal Reserve itself were alarmed by the surging growth of M-l, the effective growth of money was actually flat.

The monetarists, those who acknowledged this shift at all, claimed it was a temporary aberration. They felt sure that M-l would soon regain a predictable rate of velocity. But they were wrong again—it was not an aberration at all. Velocity began dropping in the last quarter of 1981 and it would continue to decline for the next year and a half. What was the Fed supposed to do in the meantime? Nothing in Milton Friedman’s monetary rule allowed for this policy dilemma. If the Federal Reserve stuck to the Friedman formula—providing steady, moderate growth in M-l each month while money velocity was dropping sharply—the central bank would actually be driving the real economy into deeper and deeper ruin.

“This left the monetarists out on a limb,” Teeters said, “a limb that just got chopped off.”

The emerging reality, however, was not instantly obvious to everyone. There was no meter available where monetary economists could monitor the changing speed of money and adjust the supply accordingly. Velocity was what economists called a “derived” statistic— knowable only after the fact, by dividing the money supply into the economic growth that had already occurred. In the interim, there was confusion and debate. Early on, the Fed technicians recognized that velocity was falling and some thought they understood the reasons why, but that did not settle the question of what would happen next.

Frank Morris of Boston reargued his case for abandoning M-l altogether, his skepticism shared by a growing number of colleagues. Tony Solomon of the New York Fed also urged the Federal Open Market Committee to back away from rigid adherence to the money aggregate. But the Reserve Bank presidents who were monetarists— Roos of St. Louis, Black of Richmond, Karen N. Horn of Cleveland, among others—argued the opposite case yet again. Abandoning M-l would be interpreted as the equivalent of abandoning the fight against inflation.

Henry Wallich, though he had disdain for the monetarist doctrine, nevertheless joined the monetarists in arguing for a hard line on controlling M-l. Wallich wanted to wrench out inflation at any cost—“to take the pain,” as he said—and keeping stringent pressure on money growth would accomplish that result, regardless of the theory. In Wal-lich’s orthodoxy, holding down the economy could never be a mistake so long as some price inflation remained.

Nancy Teeters, a liberal who had never believed in the monetarist claims, tried once again to convince the committee members that they had made themselves prisoners of a false doctrine. One did not have to look at M-l or money velocity or any other arcane calculations about the money aggregates to see why the Fed was driving the economy downward. The straightforward explanation was fairly simple: the price of credit. “We had gotten rates too high,” she argued, “and we held them too high, too long.”

Teeters proposed that it was time to declare victory. Price inflation had abated dramatically. The Consumer Price Index had been running below 5 percent for four months in a row and even briefly dipped to zero. Teeters argued that the Federal Reserve could now justifiably let up—before the damage got worse.

Money was still tight—extraordinarily tight, no matter what M-l signaled. The Federal Funds rate still hovered around 15 percent, which meant that as inflation abated, the real-interest cost to borrowers was steadily increasing—exceeding 6 percent by springtime. The declining velocity of money should have been accompanied by declining loan demand and falling interest rates. Yet, as Lawrence Kudlow’s analysis had pointed out, businesses had no choice but to keep borrowing more and more. The deteriorating corporate balance sheets created a record demand for commercial loans, despite the high real-interest rates, despite the recessionary conditions.

The chairman, to his admirers, was cautious and intellectually strong-willed, but to critics he seemed stubborn and arrogant. In any case, Paul Volcker was not yet convinced it was time to ease. At the March 30 meeting of the FOMC, Volcker agreed that M-l was increasingly quirky and the Fed would have to back off a bit from the usual formulations it had followed since 1979. The Fed would be somewhat more flexible for a time—and hope that the uncertainties were clarified.

Volcker was not willing to concede that his operating method was now inoperable or that his Keynesian critics had been right. The liberal academicians, joined by some Wall Street voices like Henry Kaufman, had warned Volcker that he had chosen the wrong time in history to impose his monetarist principles. Their critique appeared to be confirmed by the present reality. Still, Volcker clung to the importance of M-l, at least in his public rhetoric, as though nothing had changed.

The monetarist approach had been politically valuable to him and he was reluctant to abandon it. As a management tool for deciding monetary policy, the money numbers had led the Federal Reserve into repeated errors and confusion, some with grave consequences for the real economy. But, as a political argument, M-l worked. In Washington, it gave the Fed chairman cover for the extraordinarily high interest rates he was imposing, a complicating rationale that most congressmen could not effectively challenge. On Wall Street, meanwhile, Volcker’s other audience embraced M-l as the talisman of Federal Reserve sincerity. The monetarist rhetoric thus blunted criticism from one power center while it nurtured favor from the other.

To discard M-l now, Volcker would have to announce to the financial system, the banks and the bond market and the money-market traders, that the Federal Reserve was once again focusing attention on interest rates. To skeptical investors, that would sound like the “bad old days” of the 1970s when the central bank allowed inflation to get out of hand. Volcker was afraid the markets might react badly. The Fed would lose “credibility.”

The Fed was in control, administering a vast national liquidation in order to eliminate price inflation and stabilize money. Like Henry Wallich and the other hard-liners, Paul Volcker figured that the longer the Fed could hold on, keeping the economy down despite the pain and protests, the closer it would get to the cherished goal, the restoration of sound money.27

Jesus Silva Herzog, the finance minister of Mexico, developed a strong memory of the lemon meringue pie served at the Federal Reserve Board’s private dining room. It was on the menu every Friday when Silva came by the Fed for his private meetings with Paul Volcker. They met regularly through the spring to discuss their mutual problem: Mexico was going broke.

Given the squeeze of recession and high interest rates, Mexico was fast approaching the day when it could not keep up the interest payments on its loans from abroad. Its currency was inflating wildly and unemployment was at 13 percent. The Mexican standard of living was retreating to the level of 1970—wiping out a decade of progress for ordinary citizens. With the peso falling in value daily, wealthier citizens shipped their money out of the country, converting their capital to stable currencies like the dollar and depleting the nation’s reserves. Mexico had to borrow more and more in an effort to stay even.

Mexico’s crisis was America’s. The two nations were economically intertwined by trade and labor supply much more closely than most U.S. citizens appreciated, but the crucial link was finance. If Mexico went under, so might several of the most celebrated names in American banking. Mexico owed $80 billion to foreign creditors, the largest share to the major American banks. In mid-April, Mexico’s largest company, Grupo Industrial Alfa, announced it could not meet the scheduled payments on its $2.3 billion in bank loans, and the banks agreed to work out a restructuring plan (Citibank and Continental Illinois each had lent more than $100 million to the company). In all, the nine largest money-center banks’ exposure in Mexican loans was equal to 44 percent of their capital. In the regulatory bookkeeping of banking, when loan payments fell far enough behind, the debt had to be written off, subtracting directly from the bank’s capital base. Citibank, Bank of America and others would be instantly imperiled.

When he met with Volcker, Silva did not threaten default nor did he need to. Both men understood that, somehow, they must keep things going. For Mexico, a general default would lead to its expulsion from international finance—no more loans from abroad to finance its trade and development. “We asked ourselves the question what happens if we say, ‘No dice. We just won’t pay’?” Silva told journalist Joseph Kraft. “There were some partisans of that. But it didn’t make any sense. We’re part of the world. We import 30 percent of our food. We just can’t say, ‘Go to hell.’”

For Volcker and his country, the stakes were even larger. A Mexican default would invite the collapse of the American banking system, starting at the top. Nervous investors and money managers would rush to pull their large deposits out of any banks with heavy exposure on foreign loans, and the panic would likely spread worldwide—a global “run” on the largest multinational banks. In theory, the Fed and other central banks of the industrial world could come to the rescue with massive loans to the Citibanks that were losing their liquidity—in effect, pumping up the money supply to save the banking system. This was not a theory anyone wished to test.

The Mexican finance minister had brought the same facts to the U.S. Treasury Department, but he did not get much response from Secretary Regan and his colleagues. At the Fed, Silva found kindred spirits. The Federal Reserve was like a State Department for finance, independently capable of arranging huge international credit transactions and prevailing on other central banks to go along. Volcker’s career specialty had been on the international side. At the New York Fed, which dealt directly every day with the global banking system, Anthony Solomon had similar expertise and, indeed, had made his fortune twenty-five years earlier running a business in Mexico. Governor Henry Wallich, the former Yale professor, had had Silva as one of his students in international economics. The Fed under Volcker, as Joseph Kraft put it, formed a kind of “Mexican mafia” within the U.S. government.28

At first, Volcker urged Silva to take his problems to the International Monetary Fund. The IMF acted like an international bankruptcy judge, supervising the affairs of debtor nations on behalf of the lenders from wealthy industrial nations. The Fund would make major loans to the financially distressed nations, but it also set the terms on which those countries must clean up their balance sheets—forcing the governments to impose conditions of austerity on their own citizens in order to preserve their status as credit-worthy borrowers. An IMF “work out” agreement meant a debtor government must reduce imports and cut back public spending, raise prices and cut wages. For political reasons, the Mexican president, Lopez Portillo, wanted to postpone the bitter medicine.

Mexico was approaching its presidential election on July 4, and the new president, Miguel de la Madrid, would not take office until December. As the candidate of PRI, the political party that had ruled since the Revolution, de la Madrid was certain to win office, but it was still bad politics, even for PRI, to introduce new measures for suffering in the midst of an election campaign.

“It was clear they were on a trajectory—they were going broke— but what could you do about it?” Volcker said. “You just sat there and wondered: when is Mexico going to blow? Is it going to blow before the election or after?”

The two men agreed on a temporary solution—a huge short-term loan from the Federal Reserve that would keep Mexico afloat until after its election. Then the new Mexican president could approach the IMF and the private banks for new loans—and also confront the Mexican citizenry with the new terms for economic austerity that the lenders would require. For starters, Volcker and Silva settled on the figure of $600 million.

“The money was designed to hold them through the summer,” Volcker said. “Then they would go to the Fund and work out new programs.”

The Federal Reserve, in addition to its other roles, was authorized to play lender of last resort to other nations. On April 30, it lent Mexico the $600 million, the first in a series of short-term multimillion-dollar loans. Technically, the transactions were called currency swaps, but as a practical matter they were like “bridging” loans. The Federal Reserve would deposit $600 million in dollars in Mexico’s account at the New York Fed and Mexico would give the Fed an equivalent quantity of pesos at the going exchange rate, promising to redeem them with U.S. dollars when the swap expired.

Since international accounts demanded payment in reliable dollars, not worthless pesos, the deal gave Mexico enough hard cash to keep paying its bills on time and avoid showing an end-of-the-month depletion of reserves on its books. The $600 million was promptly repaid a day later. On June 30, Mexico would draw another $200 million overnight from the Fed’s credit line and another $700 million at the end of July.

The currency swaps had another advantage: they could be done secretly. Volcker discreetly informed both the Administration and the key congressional chairmen and none objected. But the public reporting of currency swaps was required only every quarter, so the emergency loan from the Fed would not be disclosed for three or four months (in this instance, the currency swaps that began in April were not officially reported until October). By that time, Volcker hoped, Mexico would be arranging more substantial new financing from the IMF, and the Fed could discontinue its temporary bailouts.

The risks are pretty obvious [Tony Solomon said]. The first risk is you could have an even greater panic if there was a perception that the U.S. authorities weren’t talking to Mexico and working on an orderly solution. You would have a run on the whole financial system. There were a thousand banks lending to Mexico. It wasn’t just the larger ones. You can’t afford to underestimate how far a panic might go.

The only other risk is that the Fed wouldn’t be repaid. Technically, it’s a swap but in reality it’s a loan. Their obligation is to reverse the swap at the end of three months and pay us back in U.S. currency. But, if the country goes bankrupt and they don’t repay, their pesos are worthless.

The Federal Reserve’s discreet supervision of international solvency could be considered its highest function. The twelve Federal Reserve Banks, through their Discount lending, protected the fourteen thousand domestic banks against sudden liquidity crises that might lead to failure. On a higher plane, working with the IMF and other international lending organizations, the Fed played the same role for selected nations. The foreign assistance was done as discreetly as possible to avoid setting off a panic, but also to avoid domestic political controversy. If, for instance, the Fed had decided to lend several hundred million to rescue International Harvester (which the Fed had the legal authority to do), there would have been a great debate about the implications—and thousands of other parties demanding similar help. Bailing out Mexico, it seemed, was too grave to be controversial.

In a crunch, the potential for a crisis in the international financial system came first. It would be placed above all other considerations, including even the Fed’s dedication to controlling the domestic money supply. Volcker’s stringent money control had in fact led directly to the strains developing in international finance, first by inducing the global recession that made it difficult for debtors to keep up, then by creating worldwide the same squeeze on liquidity that existed in the domestic economy.

The world’s vast floating pool of international dollars was flowing to America. Eurodollars ignored national boundaries and went to wherever they could find the highest return. Now this was the United States, where a perfectly safe investment like U.S. Treasury bonds provided historically high yields. This lopsided flow tightened the international market for dollars and left foreign borrowers around the world scrambling for scarce funds—and paying premium prices. The liquidity pressures worldwide were similar to the squeeze confronting corporations inside the U.S., struggling to keep their balance sheets upright by borrowing more and more, despite the high cost of credit. Only, instead of private corporations in danger of failure, these were sovereign nations.

Mexico was the first visible crack in the system—visible at least to those in charge. In April, the problem seemed containable. But the Federal Reserve could not afford to let the crack develop into a full-scale breakdown. It would lend the money to Mexico and hope that things could be worked out later.

“There’s a small risk that someone will criticize you,” Solomon said. “Why should the Fed do this? On the other hand, most reasonable people would see that this was a crisis. It had all the classic conditions of financial crisis.”

Oh May 17, Wall Street was shaken by a second crack, a smaller fissure to be sure, but still unsettling. An obscure bond dealer, Drys-dale Government Securities, Inc., went bust, but the failure sent tremors through several of the most prestigious banks, Chase Manhattan and, to a lesser extent, Manufacturers Hanover and United States Trust. Drysdale, with very little of its own money, had been playing a trader’s game with government securities, borrowed from Chase and the others, on the staggering volume of $2 billion—using short-term repurchase agreements on Treasuries to speculate on future prices. When it gambled that bond prices would fall and they didn’t, Drys-dale’s position was wiped out. Chase disclaimed any responsibility for the losses other traders were sustaining on the “repo’s,” and the traders—who thought they were dealing with the Chase bank, not some obscure and high-flying gambler—panicked.

Bond prices fell sharply, and in the confusion, there was spreading fear that other Wall Street firms would be pulled down with Drysdale. Investors dumped bank stocks, particularly Chase Manhattan’s, and the Chase stock price fell nearly 10 percent in two days. Firms scrambled to secure their own clear ownership of bonds and their claims against the default.

It was unsettling, to say the least, that such a huge speculative venture could operate so loosely, depending on the tacit blessing of the most reputable bankers. The government-securities market, largest financial market in the world, was unregulated by the federal government, save for the supervision that the Fed applied to the thirty-six major dealers who were authorized to trade with the Fed’s Open Market Desk. Billions changed hands every day over the telephone and the actual paper caught up later. As the only responsible agency of government, the Federal Reserve moved swiftly to calm everyone. Since 1970, when the Fed had intervened in the collapse of the Penn Central Railroad, the central bank had assumed, de facto, a much broader responsibility for itself. In addition to protecting the banking system, the Fed would look out for financial markets generally. When panic or crisis occurred, the Fed stepped forward to reassure and stabilize.

“One of the fears in the market,” an assistant to Volcker explained, “was, how did you know the guy you were trading with was going to be in business? If this fear spread, you could have a kind of gridlock in the government-securities market—nobody would dare to trade with anybody.”

Volcker, first, had a heart-to-heart talk with the executives of Chase Manhattan and they changed their minds. Chase would cover its share of the losses, about $160 million. The New York Fed also let it be known that its Discount officer would look sympathetically on any banks suffering sudden liquidity problems because of the bond-market scare. In addition, the New York Fed lent several billion dollars in bonds from its own portfolio to the dealer firms to insure that the market had plenty of paper to trade and did not freeze up while everyone sorted out who owned what.

Finally, the Open Market Desk in New York bought bonds itself, in order to provide bank reserves “a bit more promptly than usual . . . to forestall undesired financial pressures,” its operations officers reported. The surest way to offset panic was to make certain that ample funds were available to borrowers in the money market, so no one would be caught short. That produced a temporary upward blip in the money supply, but it could be corrected by withdrawing reserves later when everyone had regained his calm. The Fed moved deftly on all these fronts and, with its swift action, the Drysdale crisis was quickly contained.29

The underlying strains on the financial system, however, continued. The savings and loan industry was in crisis, hoping for emergency legislation that would restore, at least on paper, the appearance of solvency for thousands of S & L’s. Commercial banks were feeling the same pressures as loan defaults accumulated.

William M. Isaac, chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, monitored the bank examiners’ reports and was worried by the rising number of troubled banks. Isaac advised Paul Volcker: “I’m not sure how long we can keep this up. We are getting awfully close. We’re not going to be able to stand this much longer.”30

On the day after the Drysdale failure, the Federal Open Market Committee convened for its May meeting. The panicky rumors emanating from Wall Street added an aura of crisis and confusion as Fed officials tried to sort out exactly what had happened. The committee members gossiped about Drysdale and what else might fail. Mexico, they knew, was sliding under. They were already under intense pressures and this episode seemed to raise the stakes still higher.

“It was tense,” Governor Emmett Rice said. “I was getting worried about the strength of the financial system. A number of us were beginning to worry whether we had not maintained a restrictive policy too long—and whether we shouldn’t ease up a lot.”

Anthony Solomon of the New York Fed was frustrated by the confusing variable, M-l, on which the FOMC was trying to base its policy, and he was ready to abandon it. “A few of us more pragmatic types were getting irritated with the monetary handcuffs,” he said. “It made no sense.”

Governor Charles Partee and Frank Morris, the Boston Fed president, and Nancy Teeters were similarly concerned. Morris, though he had no vote, would repeat his argument that the FOMC’s system for decision making was no longer viable. Teeters would warn again about the strains on the savings and loan industry and the financial system in general.

The Federal Reserve, however, was caught in a huge vise of conflicting pressures—the opposing demands of the financial community and the political community, pushing the policy makers in opposite directions. In Washington, the most important voices wanted the Fed to relent. But the financial markets of Wall Street insisted that it hold tight. The members of the Federal Open Market Committee, in addition to resolving the technical complexities of money and the economy, would decide, implicitly, which group they would heed, the politicians or the financiers.

At the White House, James Baker had had his fill of the monetarist economists and their endless talk about M-l volatility and their wrong forecasts of recovery. If Baker listened to them, the White House would be urging the Federal Reserve to tighten the money supply again. Through April, M-l growth for 1982 was running at nearly 9 percent, far above the FOMC’s target range for the year of 2.5 to 5.5 percent. “We believe firmly if monetary growth is brought back down to the upper end of the Fed’s target range, interest rates will come down,” said Jerry Jordan, a member of the Council of Economic Advisers.31

Tightening the money supply again will lower interest rates? Baker didn’t buy it. The President’s chief political adviser did not claim any special sophistication about monetary policy, but he belatedly grasped that money was too important to leave to the economists. “Jim Baker has a Texas banker’s mentality,” David Stockman said. “It starts with the proposition that high interest rates are bad, that the Fed is responsible for them and the Fed has the discretion to lower interest rates and get the economy moving again.”

Baker decided to do a little “Fed bashing” of his own. The economic damage was still spreading and interest rates were not falling. Corporate profits had fallen by 17 percent in the first quarter, one of the worst on record. The index of industrial production had declined two points since March. Business bankruptcies were at a post-Depression peak, 280 new ones every day, and now engulfed larger corporations, Braniff International, Wickes Companies, AM International, Saxon Industries, and Lionel, the toy-train maker.32 “How long can they let this misery go on?” Baker kept asking White House associates.

A memorandum from Lawrence Kudlow of OMB confirmed the gloom: “Looking at the empirical data now in hand, claims for a strong second half recovery are without foundation. Indeed, without immediate relief in the financial sector, claims for any recovery during the second half appear shaky.” Why? “The bottom line for the economic outlook is quite simple: interest rates are way too high,” Kudlow explained.33

Baker and his deputy, Richard Darman, became more and more vociferous in their conversations with Volcker and others, urging the Fed to loosen money and get the recovery started. “We had the fall elections obviously in mind,” an Administration official said. “There was a fair amount of frustration, a sense that the Fed was overdoing with too much discipline.” Baker was not sure whether private admonitions from him or anyone else, even the President, could budge Volcker, but if there was no economic recovery, Republican candidates would pay dearly in the November elections.

While the most senior officials at the White House were turning up the heat on Volcker, the Treasury Secretary let it be known, not entirely by coincidence, that his department was undertaking a major new study on government reform. The subject: the independence of the Federal Reserve. Among the proposals that would be considered were whether the Secretary of the Treasury ought to have a seat on the Board of Governors (the original arrangement in 1913, when the Fed was created) or whether the central bank should become a subagency of Treasury, fully answerable to the President (the idea that Paul Volcker himself had once endorsed in his senior thesis at Princeton).

“Everybody was just frantic,” a Treasury Assistant Secretary said. “They saw the ’82 elections coming up and they were desperate for a recovery. It was miserable at Treasury; it was frantic. We could see all these House seats going down the drain.”

At the May 18 FOMC meeting, Volcker reported on the various political assaults on the Fed’s independent status. Congressional leaders were drafting their version and now Treasury was hinting that it might join the struggle with its own proposal for emasculating the Federal Reserve. Perhaps these were empty threats, but loss of its independence was the most threatening question that could confront the institution.





Still, the message the Fed heard from the financial markets of Wall Street was quite the opposite. Do not quit now, the money traders warned, because we are still not convinced. If the Fed eases prematurely, then inflation will come surging back. It has happened before and it can happen again.

The FOMC will not ease its money policy, Lacy H. Hunt, chief economist at Fidelity Bank in Philadelphia, predicted a few days before the May meeting. “When the Federal Reserve made mistakes in the past, it was to ease too quickly.”

But H. Erich Heinemann, a monetarist economist at Morgan Stanley, was skeptical that the Fed would keep faith with the financial markets. The M-l numbers, he noted, were alarmingly above target.

These developments are disturbing [Heinemann wrote]. They imply that the Federal Reserve System, despite the vigor of its anti-inflationary rhetoric, may be willing to tolerate considerably faster monetary growth. . . . Should this prove to be the case, it would tend to confirm the worst suspicions of market participants. ... It would tend to confirm the widespread fear among managers of financial asset portfolios. . . .

A few important voices—Henry Kaufman of Salomon Brothers, Edward Yardeni of E. F. Hutton, George McKinney of Irving Trust and others—were urging the Fed to abandon M-l and ease its money policy. But the weight of opinion in financial markets was overwhelmingly against any relaxation. Indeed, a survey of 138 money managers, conducted by Oppenheimer and Company, warned the Fed: “The main concern expressed by the executives was fear of renewed inflation—not fear that the recession would be too severe.” Bankers of the Federal Advisory Council delivered the same message—don’t let up.34

The Federal Reserve chairman chose to heed the advice of the financial markets and the bankers. It was still too early to ease. Volcker was afraid of how they might react if he did. He invoked the familiar talisman of “credibility.”

Nancy Teeters was tired of hearing M-l employed as an emblem of the Federal Reserve’s “credibility.” “People talk about the credibility of the Federal Reserve,” she said. “I’ve never quite known what they are talking about. The monetarists did this big drumbeat that the Fed was no longer credible, but if we just controlled the aggregates, the world would be a safe place. One way or the other, what we control is interest rates.”35

Furthermore, the “inflation fears” of investors seemed increasingly precious. The Consumer Price Index had fallen in April to an inflation rate of only 2.4 percent. Commodity prices, including food and oil, were flat or falling. Labor was in rout, accepting substantial retreats on wage demands in major new contracts for auto workers and teamsters. How much grief did the bankers and bondholders demand before they would be satisfied? The answer was: they demanded more.

For the FOMC members, the question went beyond the technical uncertainties of M-l growth or even whether inflationary pressures had truly been broken. The issue was also how to preserve the good name of the Federal Reserve. The Fed had erred in 1980, but, more grievously, it had gone astray in the 1970s and allowed inflation to reach double digits. The bondholders, the money managers, the bankers, had still not forgiven them.

“These markets are incredibly quick to revive inflationary expectations—the banks, the traders and speculators,” Tony Solomon insisted. “They would be the first to act on any hint. This is a very nervous group of people and you have to handle them very carefully.”

The Federal Reserve was still making amends for sins of the past— still apologizing to the bondholders for the central bank’s presumed failure to defend their assets in prior seasons. “Once you have a reputation as a bad boy,” Solomon lamented with a bitter trace, “you have to spend ten years being a good boy to change their minds.”

The Fed would show Wall Street it was still being a “good boy.” After all the debate, all the various doubts and uncertainties, the May directive adopted by the Federal Open Market Committee was essentially designed to comfort the anxieties of Wall Street. Despite the confusion of declining money velocity, despite the visible strains and accumulating damage, the chairman proposed that monetary policy be left unchanged for another six weeks, neither easing or tightening.

The real economy would have to wait a while longer for relief, at least until the next meeting of the FOMC in July.

Volcker’s position easily prevailed, despite all the doubts expressed around the table. The Reserve Bank presidents, who were monetarists, were naturally satisfied, since they shared the bankers’ fixation with M-l. Hard-liners like Wallich were pleased too. Those committee members who had misgivings—Solomon, Partee, Rice and perhaps others—swallowed their doubts and voted with Paul Volcker.

The only dissenting vote was Teeters’s.

Mrs. Teeters dissented from this action because she favored specification of somewhat higher rates of monetary growth . . . with the objective of improving liquidity and easing financial pressures [the FOMC minutes said]. In her opinion, the time had come to foster lower and less variable interest rates in order to enable prospects for significant recovery in output and employment.

Nancy Teeters thought that relying on the financial markets for guidance, in those tense circumstances, was a fundamental mistake. “I don’t understand why long-term rates didn’t come down, but they didn’t,” she said. “They stayed very high for a very long time. Why? That’s where the psychology comes in. The markets were so pessimistic. The markets had been beaten back to the point where they thought we were never going to ease.”

Some of her colleagues concluded—after the fact—that Teeters was right: the Fed should have eased in the spring. In any case, the decision was devastating for the economy—leaving a deeper wound that would take years to heal.

“In hindsight,” Anthony Solomon conceded, “we probably should have broken away from the monetary aggregates in the spring and used real GNP and inflation as our targets. If the money supply had been weak, then we could have done that and not had any problem with the monetarists. We could have moved to liberalize and bring down interest rates and get the economy revived.”

Governor Emmett Rice agreed with Teeters, at least after the vote. The Fed had held tight too long and the financial system was endangered. But he had decided not to vote with her.

“I thought Teeters was right,” Rice said, “but I didn’t think she was right enough to dissent with her. It wasn’t all that clear she was right or that this was the time to dissent. Too much significance would be attributed to it. People were worried about the pressures on the financial system, but we felt we couldn’t back away now.”

The chairman and most committee members had no regrets. Holding the money supply tight a while longer—painful as it was for the losers in the real economy—would squeeze a bit more out of prices, more out of labor and commodity producers, small businesses and manufacturers. In the majority’s view, the longer the Fed held its position and ignored the complaints, the larger the benefits might be in the future—stable prices, a dollar with certain value, an economic recovery that could proceed without price inflation.

Henry Wallich, for one, was proud of the Fed’s performance in this tense season. “People stood their ground,” Wallich said. “We didn’t stampede.”

As for the political attacks on the Fed, Volcker and Wallich dismissed them as inconsequential. “People like to believe the Federal Reserve tries to favor one political party over another,” Wallich said, “but here we saw Nancy Teeters, a liberal, voting to enhance the political fortunes of Ronald Reagan, and me, a conservative, voting to enhance the other side. I think that confounds the theory of political influence on the Federal Reserve.”

The political influence that was at stake did not belong to Republicans or Democrats, but to the Fed itself. In the course of fighting inflation, the Federal Reserve had gained the high ground and was in control of events. Its influence was superior to that of Congress and of the President, and, like any political institution that has seized control, the Federal Reserve and its chairman were not eager to yield.





