14 THE TURN


On June 24, the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City dispatched four of its bank examiners to Oklahoma City to investigate a troubled institution called the Penn Square Bank. The managers of Penn Square needed a quick $15 to $20 million in emergency Discount lending to maintain the bank’s liquidity, but the Fed examiners had to make sure that Penn Square still had sufficient collateral to qualify— bonds or sound loan paper that the Fed could take as security. It was another bank in crisis, but this was why the Federal Reserve existed, its original purpose, to protect the banking system from sudden failures and spreading panic.

For months, regulators from the Comptroller of the Currency’s office, the federal agency that supervised nationally chartered banks, had been alarmed by Penn Square’s deteriorating condition. More and more of the bank’s loan portfolio was deemed worthless and uncollectible, mainly loans for oil and gas development made in the heady boom time when oil prices were still soaring. The good times would last forever, it seemed then. Now oil prices were falling and the collapsing prospects for Penn Square’s borrowers were translating into failed loans. As the Comptroller’s examiners ordered millions in bad loans written off at a loss, Penn Square’s capital evaporated to the point of vanishing. The bank was insolvent and government regulators would have to close it.

When William M. Isaac, chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, was alerted, he was puzzled by the tone of urgency in the warning from the Comptroller’s supervisor of regulation. The FDIC was the third partner in federal bank regulation—the insurance agency that would assume control of a failed bank, pay off the depositors insured up to $100,000, or try to arrange for another bank to take over the collapsed one and reopen it. In most banking crises, the Fed, the Comptroller’s office and the FDIC worked out the terms cooperatively among themselves. On its face, Penn Square did not seem like a major event.

I kept asking myself, “Why is he over here talking to me about a $500 million shopping-center bank in Oklahoma City as if it’s a big crisis [Isaac said]?” Then he told me. This bank involves a lot more because it has sold about $2 billion in loan participations to other banks—Continental Illinois, Chase Manhattan, Seattle First, Michigan National. His concern was the ripple effect on those other banks, if it’s not handled right.1

Penn Square was notorious in its wishful thinking. Its executives were the classic freebooters—entrepreneurial bankers who hustled new loans for oil drillers based on the most generous assumptions about the prospects for finding oil and gas, about the future price of oil, about the borrowers’ ability to repay. The federal examiners found a general recklessness and even fraud in the loan portfolio.

But the hustlers from Penn Square could not have done this by themselves. Their modest-sized bank simply did not have the capacity. A bank’s assets, its loans, were supposed to balance with its liabilities, its deposits. A shopping-center bank with less than $500 million in deposits could not carry $2 billion in loans on its books. So Penn Square simply sold the loans—“upstream,” as bankers say—to the larger banks that wished to share in the bonanza.2

Continental Illinois, largest bank in the Midwest and seventh-largest in the nation, picked up more than $1 billion of loan participations with Penn Square. Lesser amounts, but still in the hundreds of millions, were absorbed by Chase Manhattan and the others. They gave Penn Square the capacity to lend more and more and take greater and greater risks.

Continental was already famous itself as a go-go bank, though on a vastly larger scale than Penn Square. Its management was driven by a high-growth strategy so successful that Continental’s lending activity had increased by 50 percent in only five years, a $40 billion bank that had eclipsed its crosstown rival, First Chicago, and become, in the words of its aggressive chairman, Roger E. Anderson, a “world-class bank.” Anderson was honored by the business magazine, Duns Review, which declared his bank one of the five best-managed corporations in the country. Continental Illinois, said The Wall Street Journal, was “the bank to beat.”3

Penn Square, in effect, acted as a business scout in the “oil patch” for Continental and the others. When Penn Square booked loans and reached its lending capacity, it simply offered a share of the action to the larger banks, collected the equivalent of a finder’s fee, then turned around and went out to find more oil prospectors who needed money. This was very profitable for everyone, while it lasted, and Continental Illinois’s stock climbed from $25 to $40 a share in less than two years. The largest and most admired banks in America were, it developed, as inattentive to the question of loan quality—the prudential rules of banking—as the hustlers in cowboy boots from a shopping center in Oklahoma.

To avert an immediate failure, the Federal Reserve agreed to lend $20 million—and more if needed—to keep Penn Square open until some sort of solution could be worked out. But the officials from the three separate federal regulatory agencies were in fundamental disagreement about how to clean up the mess. The Fed wanted to keep Penn Square going, whatever the cost, until a new owner could be found to acquire it. The Comptroller’s staff agreed. Isaac of the FDIC wanted to shut it down, pay off the insured deposits up to $100,000 and teach everyone else a lesson. If no acquisition was arranged by the FDIC, anyone who held Penn Square’s CDs in denominations above $100,000 would lose—credit unions, other banks, money funds, private investors. But the biggest losers would be those major banks that had shared in the dubious action of Penn Square’s loan portfolio.

The threatened bankers swiftly joined the federal regulators in the private arguments over what the government should do.

Continental came in, Chase came in and the others, all urging us to handle it in certain ways [Isaac said]. We explored with Continental Illinois and others a merger. They had all kinds of schemes that would keep Penn Square going under new ownership so we would not have to liquidate all those loans. Continental Illinois and the others were trying to give us all their lousy loans. From the FDIC viewpoint, that was a bad deal.

The argument continued through the last days of June and into the July 4 weekend, as Penn Square Bank ran out of money. In the discussions, the money-center banks were supported by Federal Reserve officials, including Volcker, general counsel Michael Bradfield, and John E. Ryan, the Fed’s director of supervision and regulation, all of whom feared “severe consequences” for the larger banks if the one in Oklahoma was liquidated.

“The FDIC could have done what they normally do in a bank failure —take out the bad loans and make that up with FDIC money,” Brad-field argued. “Or you could put capital into it and take over management control. If you had taken out the bad loans, you could have found a buyer.”4

Isaac had two objections—the cost and the principle. Reimbursing the insured depositors up to $100,000 would cost the insurance fund a maximum of $240 million, but if the FDIC assumed responsibility for the entire Penn Square operation, the potential loss would be much greater. Penn Square, like any other aggressive bank, had accumulated a huge pool of “off balance sheet” obligations—letters of credit and the loan participations, totaling $3 billion. These commitments didn’t appear on the bank’s balance sheet of assets and liabilities, but the bank was legally liable for them nonetheless. If the FDIC assumed control, then it would be sued by the holders of these credit instruments and Isaac figured the losses in legal claims could total $500 to $700 million. Among the claimants who would be suing the FDIC would be Continental Illinois and the other banks, trying to get their money back.

Isaac was an apostle of free-market principles and he wanted to teach the bankers a lesson in accountability—a lesson that would also be absorbed by the institutional investors, pension funds, money-market mutual funds, state and local governments, and others, whose money managers parked billions of dollars in banks through large-denomination CDs or commercial paper issued by bank holding companies. In the spirit of financial deregulation, the FDIC chairman thought the losses would be good discipline for banks and bank investors, a strong reminder that they have responsibility for judging risks on their own, instead of simply relying on the government.

“If we bail out this thing,” Isaac told the other regulatory officials, “and assume the expense for Continental Illinois, Chase, Seafirst and the others, what kind of signals are we sending to the financial system? That you can engage in the most shoddy banking practices and, in the end, the government will bail you out.”

The others thought Isaac was naive and a little bullheaded. “One person came to the table with such a fixed idea, that it was a good idea to bring discipline to the market,” said Bradfield. “But the question is how you get the right discipline on the market without destroying it— the baby with the bath water.”

Isaac’s principle of free-market risk sounded unassailable in the abstract, but Volcker and his regulatory assistants were worried by a greater, more immediate risk. If the government refused to step in and assume the burden of loss in Penn Square, there could be a general panic among the large investors—the financial institutions that lent billions of dollars every day to large banks like Continental. When they heard the bad news about Continental’s losses, prudent money managers would simply stop buying CDs from Continental or the other larger banks that were burned in the questionable loan partnerships. The sudden sense of insecurity might even extend to banks that weren’t involved with Penn Square but were exposed on other shaky fronts—such as Citibank, Manufacturers Hanover and the other money-center banks that had lent so heavily to Latin America. When a market panic started, it was impossible to predict which way the crowd would turn or how far it would stampede.

With the speed of a Telex message, money managers across the nation would begin shifting their funds to safer depositories and decline to buy new CDs from any banks that seemed risky. But a bank like Continental could not function if it could not borrow a huge volume of money every day. That was the principle of “managed liabilities” banking that enabled banks to grow aggressively—book the loans first, then borrow the money to fund them. If Continental was unable to sustain its huge daily borrowing, as much as $8 billion a day, its own operation would become imperiled. It was in this manner, literally overnight, that a liquidity crisis starting in an obscure bank in Oklahoma City could spread instantly to Chicago and Seattle and Detroit, perhaps even to New York.

“For the Fed,” Isaac said, “the only issue was what effect it would have on the money-center banks. The Federal Reserve position was that a deposit payoff would be catastrophic and we simply had to find a way to work this out. By ‘we,’ they meant the FDIC.”

The Federal Reserve had another reason for avoiding any disturbance in the banking system. A liquidity crisis could force the Fed to alter its monetary policy, pumping up the money supply in order to avert a disaster. “They don’t like to see ripples anywhere in the system,” Isaac said, “because the ripples cause them to react on monetary policy and they don’t like to do that.”

To Bradfield, Isaac was making empty debater’s points. With Jack Ryan and the Comptroller’s supervisor of regulation, Paul Homan, he persisted in trying to change Isaac’s mind. If the worst did happen, of course, questions would be raised about both the Federal Reserve officials and the Comptroller, who were jointly responsible for the soundness of banking. How could they have let this pyramid of reckless banking happen in the first place?

At one point in the debates [Isaac said], Paul Homan was pounding the table and saying, “Goddammit, I don’t care what it costs. If it costs $1

billion, you’ve got to bail it out. If you don’t, Continental Illinois is going to fail and who knows where it stops.” I said, “Paul, if Continental Illinois fails, we will deal with Continental Illinois. We’ll recapitalize Continental Illinois and stop it there. We can’t stop it here.”

The issue was resolved, in a sense, by the “upstream” banks themselves—Continental, Chase, Seafirst and Michigan National—all of whom refused to risk any of their own money to save the situation. They could have taken the responsibility for injecting new capital. When that proposal didn’t work out, the federal regulators suggested an alternative: if Continental, Chase and the others would waive their potential claims against Penn Square, that would make it much easier —and cheaper—for the FDIC to assume responsibility and keep Penn Square open. The bankers talked back and forth but, in the end, declined to assume any risk themselves. Chase Manhattan had just been burned by its losses on Drysdale Securities. If Continental and the others were to assume a share of Penn Square’s troubles, they would have to forgo the right to sue their own insurance companies, alleging negligence on the part of their own management officers who had bought the participations in Penn Square loans. In other words, the bankers wanted the federal government to take the losses while the banks remained free to cover their own mistakes.

“We wanted the banks to take part in the bailout,” Bradfield said, “and when they wouldn’t, that’s when it collapsed. They all refused to put any money in or forgo their own claims. They didn’t want to make any contribution and that killed it.”

On the Monday holiday, July 5, all the chief regulators gathered in Volcker’s office at the Federal Reserve building, joined by Treasury Secretary Donald Regan, to settle the question. Technically, the Treasury Secretary had no authority to decide the issue for the regulators, but everyone understood that if calamity occurred, it would be the elected government, the President and his officers, not little-known bank regulators, that would have to deal with the damage to the national economy. The Treasury Secretary’s opinion was important.

Regan, according to Isaac, asked all the principals: “Does anybody think, if you do a deposit payoff, that there will be chaos, that the financial markets simply can’t stand it?”

In Isaac’s account, Volcker responded: “I think there’s a substantial chance of that.”

Volcker’s concern was seconded by Todd Conover, the Comptroller. The Fed chairman was also supported by the new vice chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, Preston Martin. Martin, a California financier and businessman, was Ronald Reagan’s first appointment to the Board of Governors, replacing Frederick Schultz. Martin had served as chairman of the Federal Home Loan Bank Board, which regulated and lent to savings and loans much as the Fed supervised commercial banks, so he had a regulator’s sensitivities to the potential risks.

William Isaac, however, repeated his case for disciplining the financial markets: “If we bail out this one, bad as it is, if we take Continental Illinois and the rest of them off the hook and they don’t have to pay a thing, then the markets will know that, no matter what risks they take, the government will bail them out. Eventually, it’s going to lead down the road to nationalization of the banking system.”

What Isaac was suggesting seemed improbable, given the political power of banking, but his logic was this: if the American taxpayers someday came to realize that they were actually underwriting all the risks for private banks, sooner or later the public would demand that the government take control of bank lending.

The Treasury Secretary sided with the FDIC chairman.

A few hours later, in early evening, the announcement was made. Penn Square Bank would not open Tuesday morning. The Comptroller declared the bank insolvent and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation seized its assets and placed it in receivership. The insured depositors would be swiftly reimbursed in the full amount of their accounts. The other creditors and claimants would have to stand in line and wait for a share of the bankrupt bank’s diminished assets.

In the short run, Isaac was correct. The financial system reacted defensively when it heard the news, but it did not unravel in fear and chaos. For the longer term, however, Volcker and the other regulators were right. There were “severe consequences.” Nine months later, Seattle First was at the edge of failure itself and, to save the situation, was sold to the Bank of America. Nearly two years later, Continental Illinois would fall. When nobody else would step in to buy it, the federal government did.

But the reckless little bank in Oklahoma City produced a far greater ripple than any of these. When Penn Square failed, it was another, more dangerous fissure in the American financial system. It sounded like the rending of fabric, and members of the Federal Open Market Committee swiftly changed their minds about the correct course for monetary policy. Instead of following the chairman, the majority now pleaded, even demanded, that Paul Volcker at last relent.

“Penn Square was very sobering,” Governor Emmett Rice said. “It made believers out of a lot of people. The system was very fragile and Penn Square confirmed our thinking. A number of us were asking ourselves if we could take responsibility for what was going to happen if we didn’t change policy.”

The Federal Open Market Committee convened for a two-day meeting on Wednesday, June 30, right in the middle of the uncertainty over Penn Square. While Volcker and the Fed’s regulatory officers argued with the FDIC over how to handle the Oklahoma failure, the FOMC deliberated in the boardroom on the larger questions of economic regulation—M-l, interest rates and the outlook for the real economy. The mood of the meeting was tense, obviously influenced by the cloud of potential crisis hanging over the banking system.

Nancy Teeters felt an uncomfortable sense of vindication. Events were fulfilling the stark warnings she had delivered earlier, but she was still not sure if the others shared her alarm. “The financial fabric did begin to tear, things did begin to rip,” she said. “The S & L’s were already under water. We were already getting small bank failures. The oil loans were collapsing. A lot of the financial structure was beginning to get very, very shaky.”

The random manner in which isolated crises popped up in odd places and threatened wider consequences—first Mexico, then Drys-dale, now Penn Square—reminded Teeters of what she had read about the waves of bank failures after 1929. In that disaster, the Federal Reserve had held the money supply too tight for too long, when it should have been pumping liquidity into the financial system.

“After the Penn Square failure, I began to get the feeling we might be headed toward something we hadn’t seen since the 1930s,” she said. “Here is a bank located in a shopping center in Oklahoma that nobody’s ever heard of before, that has participated in billions of dollars of loans and farmed them out to some of the biggest banks in the country. All of a sudden, it fails and no one is sure what happens next.”

The chairman himself was worried. Penn Square was a psychological shock to the financial system, involving some of the largest banks. When Volcker considered the debt obligations that were exposed, the strains that were already evident, it lent a sense of urgency to his thinking.

Even Penn Square, however, was not the darkest cloud. Volcker knew that another financial crisis, larger and much more grave, was going to surface soon—the effective default of Mexico. Mexico was “going to blow,” as Volcker put it, and it was only a matter of time. On June 30, the Federal Reserve made another overnight loan to the Banco de Mexico so Mexico’s central bank could show a positive end-of-the-month balance, but the nation’s reserve accounts were dwindling rapidly.

Financial insiders were alert to this impending crisis, though not the general public. In June, Bank of America organized a new $2.5 billion loan for Mexico but had great difficulty persuading other banks to participate in the loan syndication. European banks were refusing to roll over their Mexican loans. Private capital was fleeing the country faster than Mexican banks could borrow from abroad to replenish reserves. Jesus Silva Herzog, the finance minister, was back in Washington, discreetly making the rounds at the Fed and Treasury, informing officials that Mexico would soon be broke.

If Mexico fell, that would be only the beginning. Virtually all of the major debtor nations of Latin America were facing expiration dates on their major loan packages in the coming months. If one Third World nation could no longer pay, especially one that had once been regarded so favorably, then the bankers of Europe and America would be most reluctant to renew loans to the others. All the debtor nations had been undermined by the global recession, nearly all were falling behind. If Mexico failed, lending would stop and the debt crisis would cascade through the Third World, from Mexico to Brazil, Argentina, Peru, Chile, Venezuela and others.5

Confronted with these threats, Volcker and his colleagues also had to face up to another disappointing reality. The recovery of the American economy, heralded for so many months by so many forecasters, including the Federal Reserve’s, now looked more remote than ever. The incoming economic data on everything from consumer spending to industrial production were all down, not up. The American economy —crucial to world recovery—was sinking still lower. Perhaps the Federal Reserve policy makers should not have been surprised by this, given that the Fed itself had tightened money again back in February, and that through the spring, the Fed had kept short-term interest rates at a punishing level, ignoring the pleas for relief. Nevertheless, they were surprised.

Governor Lyle Gramley recalled:

Early in the year, I was making speeches predicting an upturn in the economy in the second quarter, and when that didn’t happen, I said by midyear. By June and July, with each passing statistic, it became increasingly evident that the turnaround wasn’t going to be there and something had to be done. If the economy did not turn up soon, a renewed wave of pessimism could spread through the business community and lead to a new curtailment of plans for investment. It became abundantly obvious to me and others that no upturn was developing. Our expectations were thoroughly disappointed. The gloom and doom was beginning to spread.

All three of these realities—the shakiness of the domestic banking system, the looming crisis in Third World debt, the downward slide of the American economy—interacted with one another and all argued for the same thing: the Fed must ease. No matter what M-l or other monetary aggregates dictated, the world could not take any more of this. If the Federal Reserve did not reverse course quickly, pump up the money supply and bring down interest rates, something far worse than inflation might result.

It was a rare moment of conjunction for the Federal Reserve, when all its diverse responsibilities seemed to fuse in a single powerful moment of crisis. As a governing institution, the Federal Reserve functioned in three distinct though overlapping realms. It manipulated the money supply and the course of the domestic economy. It regulated banks and watched over the financial system at large. It served as unofficial supervisor and lender of last resort for the vast network of global finance, the fate of nations. At this moment, all three of these roles converged on a single, anxious question: could the Federal Reserve get the American economy started again?

If economic activity continued to decline, then the failure of banks, thrifts and other financial institutions would naturally grow worse. Where would the next Penn Square pop up and how far would it spread? And if the U.S. economy did not begin to expand, then the debt problems of the less-developed countries would multiply. America was the major market that bought exports from those debtor nations, but when America was in contraction, its purchases from abroad contracted too. If Americans did not start buying exports again from Mexico or Brazil or the others, there was no way those countries would ever find the income to keep up with their mounting debt payments. Ultimately, their crisis would come home to become America’s. As the Fed well understood, the situation literally threatened to collapse the U.S. banking system at its top-heavy apex—the money-center banks of Wall Street that were so overexposed.

No other concern touched more deeply in the institutional mind and memory of the Federal Reserve. This was its original charter, the mantle of responsibility it had inherited in 1913 from J. P. Morgan. The Fed was to protect the safety and soundness of the banking system and, in a crisis, that was the obligation it placed above all others.

“This international debt appeared to be a very, very serious threat to our financial markets,” Gramley said. “The overriding concern had to be to provide enough stimulus through monetary policy to turn the U.S. economy and the world economy around and get business activity moving up again. There was no way we could hope to resolve the problem of LDC debt unless we permitted those countries to sell exports again.”

As the discussion unfolded in the Federal Open Market Committee, it was obvious that a new consensus had developed. Now was the time to loosen up, the majority argued, and ignore contrary signals from M-l. Six weeks earlier, though many had harbored misgivings, they had gone along with the chairman and kept the money supply tight. Now, they were arguing insistently for easing. They pleaded with Volcker—even demanded—that the Fed must turn its policy around in order to bring down interest rates and stimulate an economic recovery.

“The majority argued strongly and very hotly for ease and Volcker went along with them,” Anthony Solomon said. “Maybe Volcker, in a mild way, initiated it.” In any case, the too-long reign of M-l had come to its end.

Frank Morris of the Boston Fed said:

We came to a very critical point. All of our forecasts, the Federal Reserve’s and everyone else’s, had forecast a third-quarter upturn. But the numbers kept coming in indicating that the economy was still going down, despite the tax cuts that were going into effect. The whole world economy was contracting.

The only thing that was going up was M-l. If we had followed M-l, it would have been a terrible mistake. We would have had to push interest rates up still further. This would have been disastrous for the world. The impact would have been felt everywhere.

Paul Volcker did not disagree. But, in his elliptical manner, the chairman wanted to move to an easier money policy without actually admitting it. Volcker was reluctant to show his hand clearly, even to other members of the Federal Open Market Committee, because he was still hypersensitive about his critics. If the chairman frankly declared himself, both the monetarist Reserve Bank presidents on the FOMC and the skeptical conservatives in the financial markets might accuse him of turning fainthearted. So Volcker preferred to let others make the case in the most strenuous terms and he left an impression with some of his colleagues that they were pulling him along.

“It was getting to the point where we had to ease, regardless,” Volcker admitted. “I became particularly antsy about the economy. Clearly, those earlier expectations that the economy would recover were wrong. I’d gotten fairly pessimistic. The strains in the financial system and the LDC debt, all those things together were pushing us. So I jumped when the opening came.”

Volcker still felt inhibited by the mystique he himself had helped to create—the fetish of the money numbers. M-l growth had been running well above its target for six months, yet the economy kept sinking lower and lower—a real-world contradiction that ought to have convinced most anyone that something was wrong with the theory of M-l.

Nevertheless, the monetarists continued to express alarm. In early June, the growth in M-l had started to accelerate again briefly and the usual voices again warned the financial world that the Federal Reserve was losing control and abandoning principle.

Milton Friedman complained that money growth was “already dangerously high” and must be curbed. Beryl Sprinkel of Treasury insisted that higher inflation would result if the Fed raised its money targets. “Raising the rate of monetary growth still higher,” Friedman explained, “might bring down interest rates for a few weeks or even months, but would then surely push them higher again.”6

The financial markets still seemed mesmerized by this monetarist logic: if the Fed increased the money supply, it would actually raise interest rates. After all, Paul Volcker had been telling Congress the same thing for many months. Volcker could not bring himself to acknowledge bluntly that it wasn’t so. Moreover, when M-l had started to accelerate in June, market interest rates had been pushed higher, anticipating that the Federal Reserve would be compelled to tighten again.

But this time, Volcker knew he couldn’t tighten. It was time, finally, to abandon the monetarist formulations that he had used to justify his stringent money control since October 1979. Although he still refused to declare himself, he seized on a brief M-l decline in late June to declare the monetarist target achieved. It was another precious rationalization, designed to mask the real fears.

At the conclusion of debate, the policy directive adopted by the FOMC was couched in the usual euphemistic language and only insiders would have grasped that the Fed was executing a dramatic reversal. The short-run money targets were raised, instead of lowered. The committee decreed blandly that “somewhat more rapid money growth would be acceptable.”

“Well,” Anthony Solomon announced dramatically after the roll call, “this is a historic step.” Volcker discouraged such talk. “I think you’re overstating it, Tony,” the chairman chided. Volcker, Solomon said later, “tried to soft-pedal it because he didn’t want the monetarists going around shooting at him.”

Solomon was right, however. It was a historic moment.

For thirty-three months, the Federal Reserve had imposed the most severe discipline on the U.S. economy—and the world’s—ever attempted in the history of the American central bank. The Fed’s money policy had forced interest rates up to the highest levels of the twentieth century, levels that would have been called usurious in other times, that would have been impossible to sustain before the deregulation of financial markets. In effect, credit was rationed for two and a half years and the scarce supply of credit was allocated by price—the high price of money effectively eliminated borrowers who were too small or underfinanced to afford the loans.

Despite the initial false start in 1980, the discipline worked. The Gross National Product contracted in real terms by more than $82 billion from its peak and, since 1979, the country had accumulated as much as $600 billion in lost economic output. The excess supply of goods, the declining incomes, the surplus labor—all had worked to force down wages and prices. Price inflation fell dramatically: from above 13 percent to less than 4 percent.

Throughout Volcker’s anti-inflation campaign, the nation was instructed by the Fed to watch M-l and the monetary aggregates as the correct gauge of its monetary policy. But the money numbers zigzagged up and down in a bewildering manner that confused even the economists. The public and the politicians would have had a far more accurate sense of what was happening if they had ignored M-l and simply followed interest rates and their relative levels. Except for two brief periods in the summer months of 1980 and the last quarter of 1981, the Federal Reserve had succeeded in holding most short-term interest rates above long-term rates for an extraordinary length of time —two and one half years. This abnormality explained things far more reliably than what was happening to M-l growth or the other aggregates. The inverted condition of interest rates meant scarce credit— the contractionary squeeze that drove away buyers and forced weaker enterprises to retrench or even fail. It was the high price of money, engineered by the government itself, that made economic recovery virtually impossible. As of July 1, 1982, this was still the unnatural condition that the Federal Reserve was imposing on the nation’s economy—short-term commercial rates remained higher than long rates.

On July 1, the Federal Reserve turned. Bank reserves would be supplied more generously, the money supply would expand more rapidly and credit conditions would be relaxed. As a result, short-term interest rates promptly started falling. Within three weeks, the Fed Funds rate and other short-term rates would subside at long last to their normal level—below long-term interest rates. This was the historic shift. Now, one could reasonably predict, the economy recovery would at last have a chance to begin.

When the financial markets opened again on Tuesday, July 6, the trauma of Penn Square quickly translated into defensive transactions.

In the stock market, investors dumped shares of Continental Illinois and Chase Manhattan, driving their stock prices lower. In the money market, anxious portfolio managers began moving billions of dollars to safer places.

The movement of funds on a vast scale briefly resembled a game of “hot money,” scurrying to find a safe hiding place in the event of a storm. Essentially, that meant moving money out of the largest banks with the greatest risk exposure, particularly those involved in the Penn Square debacle, and parking it instead in smaller and more stable regional banks or even in the safest place of all, short-term Treasury bills. The interest-rate return would be fractionally smaller, but that was preferable to losing everything if one of the major banks failed. The message from Penn Square encouraged the flight of capital: the federal government seemed to be saying it would no longer cover the losses of large-scale depositors, that they must gauge banking risks for themselves.

Continental, among others, faced an immediate crisis of funding. As Continental’s certificates of deposit came due, money managers simply declined to renew them and took their funds elsewhere. Or they insisted on purchasing CDs with shorter maturities—three months instead of one year. And they demanded higher interest rates from Continental and others. Money was rushing out of the bank and new money was reluctant to come in.

“We had some rather tense moments,” said Michael Bradfield, the Fed’s general counsel. “The spread between CDs and governments went through the roof.”

While a banking crisis of this sort was virtually invisible to the general public, financial experts could watch it developing in several key numbers. When a bank was having trouble maintaining its deposits, it raised the interest rate offered on its CDs to attract more money. Thus, if an individual bank consistently paid a CD rate far above the market average, this probably meant it had problems. In addition, investors watched the interest-rate spread between bank CDs and competing alternatives such as Treasury bills. When the spread widened between three-month bank CDs and three-month Treasury bills, it was a sure sign that there were a lot of nervous bankers. In the weeks after the Penn Square trauma, compounded by the anxieties over the banks’ foreign-debt exposure, this basic spread jumped from 1 percent to 3 percent.

The Federal Advisory Council reported to the Fed:

There is no question but that banks directly involved in the Penn Square affair experienced a sharp deterioration of position in bidding for short-term funds. . . . The larger banks affected were generally able to refund some of their maturities in the Euromarket where quality spreads were narrower. These same banks have found access to the overnight Fed Funds market somewhat more limited as some lenders have either canceled or “rested” lines or authorizations to place money with them. An interesting side effect . . . has been that many good-sized regional banks are being offered greater amounts of CD money than they are used to employing in their funding positions.

The nervous money had to find a safe home somewhere, even in banks that had more money than they needed. When anxieties subsided, the money managers could shift their funds back, but until the storm had cleared, they would take no chances. For banks like Continental Illinois and Seattle First, the funding squeeze reduced profits and simply added to their more fundamental problems.

“Continental’s funding began eroding and it continued,” said William Isaac. “It turned more and more to Europe, more short-term borrowing, paying premium rates.” In other words, Continental’s functional base—the managed liabilities it raised daily to fund its bank lending—was becoming narrower and narrower.

For the Fed, the best antidote for rising anxieties in the banking system was easy money.

Open-market operations were conducted against a troubled financial background [the Open Market Desk in New York reported]. . . . Financial markets had to cope with several well-publicized bankruptcies and growing concerns regarding the banking sector’s loan exposure to hard-pressed domestic and international borrowers. Large loan losses suffered by several major banks highlighted the potential for difficulties in this area and some major banks encountered investor reluctance to purchase their CDs.

When M-l failed to expand promptly after the July meeting, Volcker twice directed the Open Market Desk to give it a generous push— simply by adjusting upward the formula for supplying bank reserves. “Two upward adjustments were made when money proved to be unexpectedly weak,” the desk reported. “Such judgmental shifts were also made to avoid situations where a mechanical adherence to the path procedures could produce unwanted results.”7 The Fed, in other words, was not going to let its money-supply rules stand in the way of pumping more liquidity into the system.

The money market took on a new glow. In the first week of July, the Federal Funds rate declined modestly. By mid-month it was down to 13.18 percent—160 basis points below its peak—and still falling. All the short-term interest rates in financial markets followed in step—

Treasury bills, commercial paper, bank CDs. On July 19, the Federal Reserve Board cut the Discount rate from 12 to 11.5 percent, the first reduction in seven months and a clear signal to money traders that the Fed intended to let the Federal Funds rate fall still lower. The Discount rate was the “floor price,” and when the Fed knocked it down, the markets knew that other rates would follow.

And they did. By the week of July 23, the Fed Funds rate for overnight lending among banks was trading just above 12 percent and falling. A week later, it was at 11 percent and the Federal Reserve Board approved another .5 percent reduction in the Discount rate to 11 percent. The prime rate set by commercial banks, stuck at 16.5 percent since February, fell 200 basis points within a month’s time, greatly easing the strains on business borrowers. The prime continued to decline with money-market rates.

A process of ratchetting downward was under way, a step at a time, without any public declarations or explanations. From July to December, the Federal Reserve Board would execute seven reductions in the Discount rate and, in the process, the Fed pulled down short-term interest rates by more than 40 percent. As long as the money markets seemed agreeable, the Federal Reserve would continue easing and even claim that it was following, not leading, this sudden decline in the price of money.

For the Fed, the crucial test was how long-term interest rates would react. If the bondholders were alarmed by the easier money, as Volcker had so long feared, then they would bid up long rates, demanding an “inflation premium” in their returns. If that happened, the prospects for recovery would be dashed. That was the theory, in any case, that had guided the Fed’s refusal to ease many months sooner.

But the bondholders applauded the Fed’s move. Long-term rates began to decline approximately in tandem with the declining short-term rates and would continue falling for the next four months. The twenty-year Treasury bond rate fell from 14.28 percent in late June to 10.56 in December. Corporate bond rates fell from 15.96 to 12.98 percent. Within three weeks of the July FOMC meeting, the Fed had pulled short-term rates down sharply enough so that all short rates were now below long rates, the natural condition for credit markets.

“The equity markets got a smell of lower interest rates and they took off,” said Governor Lyle Gramley.

In early August, as the Fed’s turn continued to unfold, an explosive rally started in the stock markets and spilled over into the bond trading. When interest rates declined, equity shares became a more attractive investment, and lower rates also suggested the possibility for economic recovery that would improve corporate profits. On August 17, the stock market recorded the largest one-day jump in its history —up 38.8 points on the Dow. Over the next six months, the index of industrial stocks would increase in value by roughly 50 percent.

The immediate trigger for the rally was an announcement from one of Wall Street’s gloomiest voices, Henry Kaufman of Salomon Brothers, the influential “Dr. Doom” who had correctly predicted rising interest rates for so many years. Kaufman reversed himself that day, predicting instead that both long and short rates would continue to decline for the rest of the year. Nothing so cheered the stock markets as a sunny forecast from a dour bond-market economist. If Kaufman saw the turn, then it must be real.

“Rates are coming down like a ton of bricks and many money-market type investments aren’t as attractive any more,” Charles Comer of Bache Halsey Stuart Shields explained. “There is a lot of cash in the hands of investors.” The bond market rallied too, though less dramatically than stocks, as bond trading volume jumped by more than 50 percent. After years of doldrum and depression, it now looked as if financial investments were ready to stage a comeback.8

In the aura of good feeling generated by the Fed’s discreet change of policy, an important contradiction was generally overlooked. This was not supposed to happen. For months and months, both Paul Volcker and various voices of the financial markets had preached an entirely different scenario: easing money would not lower interest rates, but instead would force them higher. The financial markets would check any easing move by the Fed and, therefore, as Volcker explained repeatedly to congressional critics, the Fed was helpless. It dared not let up lest it lose “credibility” among the bondholders, the long-term investors.

In the actual unfolding of events, the opposite occurred. As soon as financial markets picked up the first hint that the Fed was easing, interest rates were merrily bid downward, both short-term and long-term rates. Instead of being frightened, Wall Street celebrated. Theoretically, this development might be attributed to a sudden and unpredicted change in market sentiment, a new confidence about inflation that developed mysteriously after July 1. This seemed most improbable. A more plausible explanation was that Volcker and the Federal Reserve and the financial-market analysis they relied upon were simply wrong.

If so, the Fed had held money tight and kept interest rates high for many months based on a false premise. It was taking its signals from Wall Street and the signals were mistaken. At least one governor, Emmett Rice, candidly acknowledged as much.

“I think we misinterpreted what the markets wanted,” Rice said. “I thought they wanted us to stay tight. After the ease, I was concerned about how the financial markets would react. When they reacted positively, I was surprised.”

The “crowds” of Wall Street were, after all, composed of fallible human beings too. The participants in financial markets possibly misled themselves as well as the Federal Reserve. The masculine ideal of toughness, of stern resolve, was as appealing to financial professionals as it was to the technocrats at the central bank.

Market participants talk tough as individuals and they’re hard-liners [Emmett Rice said], but they wanted to see interest rates come down and they welcomed it. When they saw rates come down, they were very quick to jump on the bandwagon and benefit from it. If you talk to individuals in the market—dealers, bond salesmen, investment bankers, commercial bankers—they will say: “Stay tight.’’ Yet they welcomed the lower interest rates. It was the same with the Federal Advisory Council, advising us to stay tight. Then we ease and the markets rally and the same advisory council says to us: “You did the right thing.’’

The misperception had rather large consequences for the rest of the nation. For months, the Federal Reserve had held tight, insisting that this was what the financial markets demanded. The politicians from Congress and the White House, pleading for lower interest rates, were dismissed as mere politicians. Governor Nancy Teeters was ignored too. The economy was driven deeper and deeper into contraction. In effect, the national government’s management of the economy was being guided by the self-interested commentaries from a few hundred thousand financial experts in Wall Street. The Fed was steering—or was being steered—by the opinions of bondholders and their representatives and what they alone thought would be good for the nation. Only, in this case, the investors and investment experts from Wall Street were mistaken. Because they were wrong, the Federal Reserve was wrong too.

On August 3, Senator Robert Byrd, the Democratic floor leader, finally introduced the measure that he and other Fed critics had been brandishing for months, the Balanced Monetary Policy Act of 1982. The Federal Reserve would be commanded, by act of Congress, to reduce interest rates to normal levels.

It is time for Congress to wrest control of monetary policy from the hands of a tiny band of monetary ideologues in the White House, the

Administration and the Federal Reserve [Senator Byrd declared]. It is time for basic economic policy once more to be set by those elected officials who must bear the final responsibility. It is time to restore common sense, balance and stability to monetary policy.”9

The congressional politicians were, in a sense, rolling out their big gun a bit late in the day—after the battle had already been decided. They had no way of knowing this, of course, and the Federal Reserve chairman did nothing to enlighten them. The July FOMC directive was still secret—and vaguely worded, in any case. Since Volcker was denying to his own colleagues that the Fed had executed a fundamental turn in its policy, he could hardly acknowledge it to senators and representatives.

Volcker’s strongest hint of the Fed’s new direction was contained in his midyear testimony before the House Banking Committee. “The evidence now seems to me strong that the inflationary tide has turned in a fundamental way,” Volcker said. Compared to the gloomy caution in his prior assessments of inflation, this sounded like a declaration of victory.

In the meantime, Volcker assured the congressional critics, the Fed recognized the abnormalities in M-l and the liquidity strains in the financial system and, therefore, would tolerate temporary “bulges” in the money supply. But, otherwise, the chairman repeated his standard vows of vigilance and his usual scolding of Congress for the huge fiscal deficits.

And Volcker simply evaded the question of whether the Fed itself had eased. “Different people have different things in mind when they talk about easing and tightening,” he said. “I wouldn’t try to straighten that out.”10

Senator Byrd and the 31 other cosponsors could see that short-term rates were declining, but they were not sure if this was anything more than a temporary blip. Volcker, after all, attributed the falling rates to the “markets,” not to any policy change by the Federal Reserve. In the confusion, the angry senators and representatives introduced their bill to strip the Fed of its independence and Volcker continued his lobbying against it.

“Volcker was all over the Hill, trying to talk everyone out of this,” a Senate staff aide said. “Volcker just kept saying he hoped Byrd would reconsider. Byrd kept probing him, saying, ‘Isn’t there anything you can do?’ It was a very clever political strategy of the Fed—to absolve themselves of any responsibility.”

The Fed-stripping legislation was now an empty threat, however. House Democrats might conceivably have passed the bill, but it was never evident that Senate Democrats could muster a majority in the upper chamber to enact such a fundamental reform. It would require Congress to take responsibility for monetary policy—for the level of interest rates and for inflation—responsibility that many in Congress preferred to keep at a mysterious distance in the central bank. More to the point, the falling interest rates and the stock-market rally—with the hint of an economic recovery ahead—simply collapsed the congressional zeal for Fed bashing. The momentum for fundamental reform quickly dissipated.

As rates continued to decline in August, Volcker called Senator Byrd and asked him what he was going to do, now that the pressures of high rates were subsiding. The senator, according to an aide, assured the Fed chairman: “As long as interest rates are coming down, we’re not going to push it.”

Volcker had kept the political critics at bay. Later in the year, as Congress prepared to adjourn, the Senate did adopt an innocuous resolution imploring the Federal Reserve to continue driving interest rates down in order to foster economic growth but “with due regard for controlling inflation.” It was the equivalent of instructing the Fed to be all good things at once.

Senator Byrd, Representative Henry Reuss and some of the other reformers persisted in believing that their various hortatory resolutions and their threatened legislation had actually accomplished something. At least they claimed that their actions had induced the Federal Reserve to change its policy. “Together, we sent a shot across the Fed’s bow this summer and the results speak for themselves,” Byrd boasted to his Senate colleagues.11

This was little more than posturing, the kind of adolescent bravado that might have fooled the public but not the serious players of government. By the time Senator Byrd and his allies had fired their supposed “shot” at the Fed, Paul Volcker, for reasons of his own, had already turned the ship around.

The Federal Reserve, it seemed, was right not to take Congress too seriously. Volcker correctly assumed that, for all their belligerent talk, the congressional reformers did not really wish to change anything fundamental. They only wished for the punishment to stop. And, when it did, they promptly abandoned their threats and tough talk and retreated from the confrontation. Their performance resembled a charade, an outburst of angry children resisting a stern parent’s discipline, and that is how the Federal Reserve treated them, like children.

On the Republican side, politicians also felt a sense of accomplishment, now that Volcker was easing. While they never claimed any explicit deal with the Federal Reserve chairman, things seemed to be working out as if there had been one. By mid-August, Congress finally enacted a package of almost $100 billion in tax increases, paring down the huge deficits somewhat. And the Fed began easing—pulling down interest rates.

The Senate majority leader, Howard Baker, who had been privately bashing Volcker for more than nine months, reported his satisfaction to White House officials. “Howard Baker saw these interest rates come tumbling down and he declared that Paul Volcker is a fine fellow who keeps his word,” David Stockman, the budget director, said.

“I tried to get something to happen,” Baker said, “but I’m not sure I did. While I was doing all this bashing and banging, I also enlisted as Volcker’s ally.”12

James Baker, the White House chief of staff, held a less complicated view of the political exchange. With considerable risk and political energy, the White House had helped engineer a major tax increase in an election year in order to reduce the budget deficit. Now that Volcker had gotten what he wanted, the Federal Reserve should engineer a major relaxation of interest rates.

“Jim Baker carried the water,” said Lawrence Kudlow. “When the budget reduction was completed, Baker said to Volcker: ‘We’ve done our part—now you do yours.’” There was no suggestion of an explicit deal, but there was an assumption at the White House that one good turn would lead to another. In fact, there was no real connection between the two events. Volcker did not wait for the tax legislation to pass before taking action. The Fed had decided to ease interest rates a full month before final passage of the tax bill was a certainty.

The monetarist economists at the White House and Treasury were, meanwhile, alarmed by what was happening. Thanks to the Fed’s decisions in July, M-l began expanding by more than 10 percent in August. The money supply was ballooning again and they renewed their urgent warnings of future inflation. “Everyone ignored them,” Stockman said.

This time the Administration’s monetarists were told, in the clearest terms, to keep their complaints to themselves. The White House political advisers were looking at double-digit unemployment and a major debacle for Republican candidates in the November elections. They did not want anyone from the Reagan Administration suggesting that the Federal Reserve ought to tighten money again.

On the contrary, White House officials explicitly assured Volcker that he would encounter no criticism from the Reagan team if the Fed allowed the money numbers to soar above the targets. For James Baker and others, there was a belated regret that they had not taken this step much earlier in the year, when they were allowing monetarists like Beryl Sprinkel to declare the correct position on monetary policy and to encourage Volcker’s stringency.

We had thought the recession would be over in the second quarter [William Niskanen of the CEA explained]. By June, it was clear the recession was longer and deeper than we had expected. Starting in mid-July, as industrial production started coming in way low, everybody started running a bit scared. We were going to be in for another three to six months of recession.

There was a very clear signal to the Fed that the Administration wanted much higher money growth, that money growth had to be increased. By then, it was too late to save the election, but the hands-off policy would have been different if we had known the depth and the length of the recession.

As interest rates declined, James Baker personally urged Volcker to do more of the same. A genuine recovery might not develop in time for the election, but falling interest rates—and a surging stock market —provided good news in themselves. Among his colleagues, Baker frequently expressed his frustration with the Fed—that the independent Federal Reserve had been allowed to drive the economy as deeply into contraction as it had, that Volcker had not reacted sooner to the misery and dislocation and financial stress. “From that point on,” Stockman said, “Jim Baker was very skeptical about Volcker.”

The Federal Reserve chairman’s independence, however, was derived in part from the confused purposes in Ronald Reagan’s White House. A strong President who knew what he wanted and was willing to demand it forcefully might have been able to move the Fed sooner. But Reagan and his advisers wanted both things at once—tighter money and faster economic growth, rigid control of M-l and lower interest rates—goals that were fundamentally irreconcilable. Since the President was never willing to resolve his own contradictions, Paul Volcker resolved them for him.

All of the various political pressures directed at the Fed, the threats from Congress and the pleas from the White House, certainly produced caution and a tactical defensiveness at the Federal Reserve. But there was no plausible evidence to indicate that Volcker and his colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee had turned their monetary policy because they were afraid of what Senator Byrd might do to them, or Senator Baker or Ronald Reagan, for that matter.

What produced the Fed’s turn was the policy makers’ private fears of financial disorder—the shock waves from Penn Square, the threatening collapse of foreign debtors, the deepening strains on the banking system as the economy failed to recover. In the politics of money, elected politicians could be discounted or outmaneuvered. The distress from ordinary citizens in the real economy could be dismissed as necessary unpleasantness. What the Federal Reserve could not evade, ultimately, was the danger facing the banking system itself.

David Stockman, who was closely allied with Volcker in the internal policy arguments, explained succinctly what finally persuaded the Federal Reserve chairman to relent:

Volcker is a financial-institutions conservative and that’s how he thinks. The thing that impacts on him the most is disorder in the financial community. That’s what gets to him. Volcker may keep his powder dry when he sees unemployment numbers that stay too high too long. But, if there’s fragility in the financial system, then he moves.

On Friday, the thirteenth of August, Jesus Silva Herzog called once again at the Federal Reserve and the Treasury Department, this time to declare that the game was over. Two weeks before, the Fed had lent another $700 million to Mexico and now that money was virtually gone too. The nation’s liquid reserves had dwindled to less than $200 million, but capital was fleeing the country at the rate of at least $100 million a day. On Monday, when the world opened for business, Mexico would be broke.

The United States government could not allow that to happen. If Mexico defaulted on its $80 billion debt, the largest banks of America and Europe would be swamped in the resulting panic. Other debtor nations, faced with the same financial crisis, would no doubt follow Mexico’s failure. Investors worldwide would rush to find safe ground, dumping bank stocks and pulling deposits out of any banks that had heavy exposure in Third World loans. The bubble of optimism that had led Citibank and the others to lend so heavily to Mexico, Brazil, Argentina and the rest was about to burst.

The immediate solution, plainly stated, was for the United States to pump a lot of new money into Mexico—over the weekend—before the nation collapsed in insolvency. In the coming months, Mexico faced due dates on $10 billion in loan payments it could not meet, so this time the emergency credit would have to be much larger than the bridging loans the Fed had been providing Mexico since the spring. Once the immediate crisis was averted, then all the threatened parties —commercial banks, central bankers and sovereign nations—would have to work out new terms for dealing with Mexico’s long-term solvency.

In crisis, the United States government could move swiftly and on a massive scale. Between Paul Volcker at the Fed and Donald Regan at Treasury, an unprecedented bailout was arranged in three days of private meetings—$3.5 billion in new loans for Mexico. The Department of Energy agreed to buy $1 billion of oil from Mexico and to pay in advance immediately, instead of paying on delivery. The Department of Agriculture provided another $1 billion, a line of credit for the future purchase of U.S. grain and other food products. Volcker, meanwhile, organized a $1.85 billion loan pool among the central banks of the industrial world, half of the money to be provided by the Fed. All together, this new money would keep Mexico going until a more permanent solution could be worked out. By Sunday evening, the deals were all negotiated and Silva flew home to Mexico City to announce that national bankruptcy had been averted. Mexico, in effect, was now in receivership to the international financiers.

On the following Friday, the Mexican finance minister faced his private creditors. More than a hundred representatives of commercial banks gathered in the auditorium at the New York Fed to hear the details. Anthony Solomon, the New York Fed president, summarized the emergency measures that the government had undertaken on the previous weekend. Then Silva described the larger problems. Mexico needed a ninety-day moratorium from the banks on all the debt payments coming due. It would begin working out the terms for a larger loan from the International Monetary Fund. But it would also require rescheduling of its outstanding debt—and additional loans—from the commercial banks.

The bankers asked a lot of skeptical questions, but they were not in a position to refuse. The decisions made in Washington were essentially a declaration that the U.S. government would take responsibility for sorting out the debt crisis. With that imprimatur, the bankers agreed to begin negotiations on refinancing.

Many smaller regional banks, which had made only limited loans to Mexico and other Latin-American nations, wanted out. Making new loans to Mexico now sounded like “throwing good money after bad.” The wise course for a prudent banker would be to take his losses now and get out before things got worse. Some of the bankers gathered at the New York Fed, though they did not say so, intended to do just that. Mexico wasn’t their problem—it was Citibank’s and Bank of America’s and the other majors’.

But the survival of the largest banks in America literally depended on keeping Mexico afloat. And that would require new lending from the private banks, in addition to the publicly financed assistance that would come from governments and the international agencies like the IMF. A creditors’ advisory committee was appointed with representatives from Citibank, Chase, Chemical, Morgan Guaranty, Bank of America, Bankers Trust, Manufacturers Hanover and seven foreign banks. In coming months, these bankers would negotiate the new loan terms with Mexico—and they would make sure that none of their reluctant colleagues from smaller banks backed away from the deal. For purposes of persuasion, the money-center bankers would enlist the authoritative surveillance of the Federal Reserve.

In a formal sense, this was the starting point for what became known as the international debt crisis—actually, a continuing series of crisis points, as one country after another approached the brink of insolvency, then appealed for relief to the Fed, the international lending agencies and the private banks. Within the next year, fourteen other nations would undergo the same trauma that Mexico experienced in August 1982—accepting new conditions of domestic austerity in exchange for new credit from the IMF and the international banks. Each time a nation approached default, the international banking system was threatened anew, and each time, Paul Volcker and his aides from New York and Washington would play the crisis managers.

In a more fundamental sense, the debt crisis had its origins in the collision of purposes within the Federal Reserve itself. In the late seventies and early eighties, the Fed and other regulators had failed to impose prudent limits on the money-center banks and their zealous lending to the Third World. They had issued mild warnings occasionally, but they had not tried to stop the risky lending. Then, starting in 1979, Volcker launched his aggressive campaign to break inflation, rationing money tightly and imposing a stern discipline on the world economy. The global liquidation collided with the mountain of LDC debt.

In theory at least, the debt crisis might have been avoided if the Federal Reserve had not chosen such an abrupt approach to decelerating price inflation. Prudent bankers, certainly, ought to have seen the collision coming and prepared for it. Instead, men like Walter Wriston of Citibank had it both ways: they berated the Fed for its lax control of money and inflation, urging Volcker to be still tougher, while simultaneously they ignored the Fed’s mild warnings about the excessive buildup of Third World debt. It was puzzling that such intelligent and worldly-wise financiers did not see the contradiction that was engulfing their banks, but they evidently did not.

Still, even if the bankers had recognized the danger, Volcker’s strategy did not give them much time to adjust. The chairman and most members of the Federal Reserve Board had little patience with those who argued for “gradualism” in fighting inflation. The only way to do the job, they decided, was to be swift and sure, to take the pain and get it over with. Only, in this case, the pain did not go away as neatly as they had expected—it would linger on for years and years, especially for the humblest citizens of the less-developed nations.

Bringing a halt to runaway inflation in such an abrupt and extreme manner forced the foreign debtors to the wall—for approximately the same reasons it bankrupted tens of thousands of businesses in the United States. They were heavily dependent on credit, yet the Fed had drastically raised the cost of their borrowing while it simultaneously depressed their sales and incomes. If the world economy had not been pushed down so far, if interest rates had not been forced so high, these debtor nations might have survived the contraction. As it was, they had no time to adjust and really no alternative but to keep borrowing more, just as weakened American corporations had to increase their borrowing to survive the recession. Volcker’s great triumph—his single-minded and successful campaign against price inflation—was purchased at a heavy price. It burst the bubble of global debt and rattled the foundations of the international banking system.

The Mexican rescue, however, looked like a triumph of crisis management—in the short term. Within seventy-two hours, Volcker and the other government officials had engineered a massive financial bailout, and when the world’s markets opened on Monday morning, there was no crisis, no reason to panic. Very few figures in American politics questioned the intervention. Many drew a deep breath and applauded. The alternative possibilities—what might have happened to the global financial system—were too ominous to contemplate.

For the long term, however, the debt crisis represented a political and economic disaster of historic dimensions—for the struggling nations, for the major international banks, and for the government regulators who were supposed to insure the “safety and soundness” of the financial system. The damage was incalculable because it was diffused deeply and in so many directions.

For poorer countries, the debtors, it produced an era of domestic misery, a steady and unrelenting grinding down of economic aspirations. As bankrupt nations, they must forgo the normal expectations of rising prosperity in order to pay their bankers and, indeed, they would have to keep borrowing more simply to keep up with the interest payments. For the average citizens in a dozen countries, economic life began to resemble a hopeless treadmill. They would see their real standard of living steadily decline as they worked to pay off their nation’s old debts. Only the debts did not get smaller.

For the proud banks of Wall Street, the crisis produced an embarrassing dependency on Washington. For all their vigorous rhetoric about the glories of the free market and financial deregulation, the money-center banks would not get out of this mess unless the government stepped in and rescued them. As the IMF lent huge sums to the debtor nations to keep them going, the taxpayers of the United States and other industrial nations were effectively assuming the obligations in behalf of the banks. The more that the public treasuries lent to Mexico and the others, the safer would be the managers and shareholders of Citibank, Morgan Guaranty, Chase and Chemical and the others.

This naked dependency on government did not exactly make the bankers more humble. On the contrary, Wriston and other Wall Street bank executives continued regularly to denounce the meddling of Washington in their business affairs and to demand more freedom from federal regulation, even as they counted on the government to protect them from loss. The bankers were right to be so self-confident, in a sense. This was the way the system was intended to work. The Federal Reserve’s fundamental obligation was to protect the banking system, even from its own folly, and it did.

The Federal Reserve performed that role effectively. Whatever private reservations he harbored about shortsighted bankers, Paul Volcker would now serve as their principal advocate and protector, defending their claims in the tendentious negotiations with other sovereign nations, bargaining, pressuring, keeping the complex deals of global finance intact. The necessities of managing the debt crisis— saving the money-center banks—became a powerful preoccupation for the central bank, an obligation that influenced its decisions on both monetary policy and bank regulation.

For Americans at large, there were also costs. The debt crisis produced distorted economic policies from government, particularly at the Fed, and blighted the prospects for trade, growth and general prosperity. If Latin America was compelled to accept austerity, if the debtor nations were forced to restrict their imports and save their money to pay off the banks, then those nations could not buy tractors and grain and appliances and all the other goods they purchased from America in prosperous times. Austerity in Brazil and Argentina meant higher unemployment in Michigan and Ohio. Falling living standards in Mexico and Peru meant depressed farm incomes in Iowa and Kansas.

In August 1982, the debt crisis was only beginning. As Volcker and other financial officials struggled to manage the various moments of crisis in the months and years ahead, the costs would continue. There was a financial price to pay but a much larger price in terms of human suffering. Instead of dissipating gradually, both of these costs would grow larger.13

Continental Illinois had lent $200 million to International Harvester, the farm-implements manufacturer that was on the brink of bankruptcy. It had lent $100 million to Alfa of Mexico and more than $60 million to Braniff airlines, AM International and Wickes, three of the largest corporate bankruptcies of 1982. In addition to the incautious oil loans it had made through Penn Square, Continental had also gambled a huge stake on GHR Companies, a Louisiana oil-and-gas company that was also about to fail as oil prices continued to decline. The federal regulators did not at first discover the full extent of the bad loans, but they could quickly see that Continental Illinois was in even worse shape than the financial markets realized.

William Isaac, chairman of the FDIC, complained:

Continental Illinois continued to make serious mistakes after Penn Square. What should have been done right away was the board of directors should have fired the management, brought in strong management from outside, taken a huge loan write-off and eliminated its dividend to stockholders. They might have failed anyway, but if they had taken these actions promptly, there was a substantial chance they could survive. It could have restored confidence by showing the markets that they were confronting their problems and dealing with them.

None of these remedial steps were taken by Continental Illinois— largely because the Federal Reserve lacked the nerve to invoke its full authority as a bank regulator. After Penn Square collapsed, Paul Volcker also felt that the Chicago bank must shape up, but, unlike Isaac, Volcker was directly responsible, with the Comptroller, for supervising Continental. While the Fed had failed to restrain Continental in its heady days of go-go expansion, it would now attempt to correct things. The Fed’s efforts remained totally confidential, largely unknown even to financial insiders. The net outcome, however, was that nothing happened. The episode merely demonstrated again, more vividly, how the Federal Reserve, despite its legendary powers, could be cowed by a major commercial bank.

Shortly after the Penn Square crisis broke, the Federal Reserve chairman began urging the directors of Continental Illinois to clean house and straighten out their troubled portfolio. Volcker met several times with Continental’s top executives and members of its board of directors. He reviewed the situation with a special committee appointed by the bank’s directors to conduct an internal investigation. Volcker proposed remedial steps to restore soundness. By telephone and in person, he urged the directors to act.

The Federal Reserve chairman’s recommendations were rebuffed. The directors of Continental Illinois replied that they would not fire the managers, would not suspend the dividend to shareholders and would not admit the depth of the problems in their loan portfolio.

“Volcker urged them to find out whether they had a temporary funding problem or whether they had a more permanent asset-quality problem,” said Michael Bradfield, the Federal Reserve Board’s general counsel. “That would determine what kind of action they had to take. In the end, they never answered those questions.”

In the second week of August, Volcker put his warning more bluntly to Continental’s directors at a meeting at the Fed in Washington. A staff memorandum of the meeting reported:

Chairman Volcker said it was important to deal with this credibility problem as soon as possible. . . . The quality of assets issue following Penn Square raised important questions about the management. ... It is extremely difficult for officers of the corporation to conduct an independent review of their own activities because of the natural tendency to defend their own past actions. . . . The market won’t give much time for this investigation to be completed. . . . The chairman has no fixed plan, but the corporation should consider changes in management and lending policy. . . . Two choices: admit the bank has taken a hard knock but could weather the storm ... or reduce the third-quarter earnings and clean up the problems.14

Continental did not clean up its problems. The bank continued to pay quarterly dividends to its shareholders as though nothing was wrong. Roger Anderson, the aggressive chairman whose high-growth strategy had led the bank into trouble, remained in control as Continental’s CEO. A few weeks later, Anderson announced boldly that the bank had dealt with its difficulties and could now go forward confidently, business as usual. The Federal Reserve and the Comptroller knew better, but did nothing to intervene.

“Yeah, maybe we should have nailed them,” Bradfield conceded. “It fussed along for a while. Anderson made a statement that everything was fine and they were going to continue on struggling. But it was already too late. They had a $4 to $5 billion hole already.”

The Federal Reserve, by reputation, had awesome powers with which to discipline errant banks, but its leverage did not seem so impressive up against the officers and directors of the nation’s seventh-largest bank. The Fed declined to use any of its regulatory tools to compel Continental Illinois to shape up. It did not, for instance, threaten to issue a cease-and-desist order to stop dividends or change management. It did not even hint that Continental might be denied Discount privileges. In the crunch, the Fed behaved rather impotently.

What are you going to say [Bradfield pleaded]? Goddamn it, as long as Roger Anderson is chairman of your bank, we’re not going to lend any money at the Discount window? You can say it and it’s pretty intimidating, but the directors can call your bluff. Legally, you can deny Discount loans if you think there’s a risk you won’t get your money back. But, as a practical matter, you can’t. The consequences of refusing to supply liquidity support to a bank are too severe.

To apply its available powers, the Fed would have had to assume more responsibility for the outcome. If the Fed had imposed direct controls on Continental’s affairs, forced the bank to suspend dividends and change its management, the Federal Reserve would have itself been implicated in the fallout. If financial markets became alarmed and the bank failed anyway, Continental stockholders would likely blame Washington. For both the Fed and the Comptroller, it was easier to stick to private pleading and hope for the best.

“When Volcker and Conover presented their recommendations to the Continental Illinois directors,” William Isaac related, “the directors said to them: ‘Well, this will be the end of this bank and you will be to blame.’ It takes real gumption for a regulator to sit there and say, ‘I’ll take the responsibility, despite your reservations.’ We’re talking about one of the biggest banks in the world. No one knows what will happen.”

Perhaps, as the Federal Reserve’s general counsel argued, it was already too late to save Continental Illinois, but that was not a satisfying explanation. If it was too late, then there was a larger question. Why had the Fed allowed the situation to develop in the first place?

“The real failure of supervision,” Bradfield agreed, “is that nobody did anything about Continental Illinois in the late seventies and early eighties—when they were following the policy that they would become the fastest-growing lender in the nation, when they were winning management awards and Roger Anderson was named ‘banker of the year.’”

Given the political climate, given its own institutional inhibitions, the Federal Reserve did not attempt to slow down banks like Continental Illinois on the upside—when they were expanding their lending agressively. That was when the crisis was seeded and when bank regulators failed to prevent it.

That’s the dilemma of regulation [Bradfield explained]. It’s so very hard to deal with things when they seem to be working. Who was going to tell the banks not to lend to energy when energy was the hottest part of the economy and running up great profits? Or shipping? Or real estate? In the seventies, the ethos of deregulation and laissez-faire was rising—get the government off the backs of private enterprise. Examiners are affected by that too. On the downside, the examiners are embarrassed and so they want to put everybody to the wall. You have to tell the examiners that some patience is necessary to protect the banking community. . . . How can you be reasonably tough when things are good? It’s easy to be tough when things are bad.

Charles Partee, who chaired the Board of Governors’ committee on bank supervision, conceded the same failure of federal bank regulation. “It’s hard,” Partee explained. “In the context of the times, everyone thinks they are doing the right thing. To impose prudential restraints is meddlesome and it restricts profits. If the banking system is expanding rapidly, if they can show they’re making good money by the new business, for us to try to be too tough with them, to hold them back, is just not going to be acceptable.”

The case of Continental Illinois also demonstrated a profound vulnerability in the American banking system. The federal bank regulators either lacked the will or, as they insisted, the political weight to impose genuine restraint on the largest and most aggressive banks when those banks embarked on their expansionary lending binges. Yet, given the banking strategy called “managed liabilities,” there was little else to restrain these bankers, if the regulators didn’t. An old-fashioned bank, practicing old-fashioned prudence, would expand its lending only in step with its deposit base. The more deposit customers it could attract, the more loans the bank could make. The modern banks that practiced managed liabilities had no such inhibitions. They simply made new loans, then borrowed the money to fund them. As long as they could borrow freely, there was no internal brake on how fast they could expand.

The result was that huge banking enterprises—virtually all of the most important banks—were balanced precariously on very small foundations. They operated on a small core of permanent depositors and a huge pool of borrowed money. The vulnerability arose—sometimes quite suddenly—when the vast network of money managers, who lent the funds on which these banks operated, decided, for whatever reason, that a bank was itself a risky borrower.

With Continental Illinois, when you get right down to it, here was a $40 billion bank with only $4 billion in deposits [Governor Partee said]. The core of the bank was very, very small. They’re selling CDs, getting money from the Eurodollar market, selling commercial paper from the bank holding company. It was an extreme case—but it wasn’t all that unusual. Citibank has a small core too. Lots of big banks do.

Without any real restraints on these practices, the modern banking system was thus exposed to a permanent danger of “panics” at the top—virtually the opposite of the old-fashioned “runs” that used to topple smaller banks. Fifty years earlier, when small-town bankers like Marriner Eccles struggled to keep their banks open, the threat was the fear that might spread among ordinary depositors who would rush in to withdraw their accounts. The introduction of federal deposit insurance in 1933 virtually eliminated that danger.

By the 1980s, however, a new danger had succeeded it. A “bank run” of major proportions could swiftly develop if whim or rumors or well-founded fears suddenly swept through the global network of sophisticated investors—money managers, large financial institutions, other bankers. When these people became worried about their money, they did not form lines in the bank lobby; they simply sent Telex messages withdrawing billions of dollars from the CDs issued by the suspect bank. This form of panic did not threaten smaller banks, most of which still depended on a base of permanent depositors to fund their operations. The new variety of “bank runs” struck at the very top of the system—the largest and most important banks. The potential consequences of letting one of them fail seemed too dangerous to entertain.

The Fed was caught, therefore, in its own political dilemma. It could see the risks of reckless credit expansion and was responsible for restraining the banks. Yet, much like elected politicians, the Fed found it difficult to say no. In the era of financial deregulation, the central bank lacked the political self-confidence to really restrain the largest banks. As an institution, the Fed was an assembly of unelected technocrats with no political base of their own. They were ostensibly free of politics, but actually dependent for political protection on the very enterprises the Federal Reserve was supposed to control, the constituency of commercial banks dominated by the largest money-center banks. It took “real gumption” to go against them, as Isaac said.

Whenever the Fed had clearly failed to fulfill its regulatory obligations, its officers often invoked the same excuse—at least privately. They too were vulnerable, they explained, to the informal pressures of politics. Members of Congress would complain. CEOs and stockholders would object. Volcker had offered that excuse, so did Brad-field and Partee. If this was the reality, then behind its aloof image the Federal Reserve was not that different from other “captive” regulatory agencies. The Fed also responded to the mood swings of politics and business, the illusions of conventional opinion and the safe haven of bureaucratic timidity. In the hard cases, when it counted most, the Federal Reserve proved to be a lot less powerful—and a lot more political—than it pretended to be.

For two and a half years, oblivious to critics, Paul Volcker had imposed his will on American economic life. He had stared down U.S. senators and presidential advisers. Yet he could not stare down the directors of an important Chicago bank. When they said no and rejected his advice, the Federal Reserve chairman withdrew and allowed them to have their way.

There was a final, galling insult added to the Fed’s failure to prevail over Continental’s management. In 1983, with the annual rotation of membership, Roger Anderson, chairman of Continental Illinois, would join the Federal Advisory Council, the select group of twelve commercial bankers who met privately each quarter with the Federal Reserve Board. Volcker had tried to get him fired and failed. Now, as the Continental bank continued to unravel, Roger Anderson would serve as one of Volcker’s official advisers.

At a distance, Paul Volcker’s execution of monetary policy looked like a virtuoso performance. Despite the confusion and error, Volcker was determined to risk on the side of greater discipline, and because he stuck to that objective, the Federal Reserve succeeded in collapsing price inflation. The reversal of prices was faster and more substantial than even the optimists in the Reagan Administration had expected. And it took nerve. The chairman steered the economy right to the brink—and then pulled back, just in time. His maneuvers were so adroit that many did not recognize what he had engineered until months afterward. By then, the economy would begin to recover its vitality and Paul Volcker would no longer be the subject of attack. In time, the Federal Reserve chairman would be celebrated as the brave and brilliant manager of money.

But, with the brilliance, there was also a quality of blindness, a single mindedness that stubbornly blocked out the competing realities. Some of the politicians who dealt with him thought so. Senator Howard Baker and Senator Robert Byrd and James Baker at the White House—all got the impression from their private conversations with the Fed chairman that Volcker genuinely didn’t grasp the depth of the economic destruction that was unfolding. All they could offer to persuade him were the subjective evaluations of politicians, the random soundings they heard from distressed citizens, including businessmen and bankers, about how bad things were. Volcker was not convinced.

In the technocratic ethic of the Federal Reserve, insulated from mere politics, political complaints were not regarded as reliable evidence. Indeed, it was considered improper for the central bank to respond to the pleadings from politicians, who were presumed to be self-interested and shortsighted. Volcker relied instead on the scientific data of economics, the weekly and monthly numbers on money, prices and other measures that supposedly captured reality in a more objective form. And Volcker relied on the messages from the financial markets—the collective decisions rendered in the daily auctions of the marketplace as well as the informed analysis of the market participants. These analysts were said to be rational and disinterested in a way that democratic politics was not.

In both instances, the Fed was taking its signals from guideposts that proved to be grossly misleading. The monetary theory—the very meaning of the money measures—collapsed and finally had to be abandoned. The financial markets said they wanted one thing and, in the event, it was obvious what they really wanted was the opposite. In any case, when Volcker did finally yield and reverse policy, his decision was not derived from grand economic principle or finely calibrated measures of market sentiment. When the Fed finally turned, the change in monetary policy was forced upon it by events—the harsh necessity of avoiding a breakdown in the financial system.

On the evidence, the politicians were not wrong about what they saw happening to the American economy or what they tried to tell Volcker. The recession, as it turned out, was far worse than the Federal Reserve had realized. The politicians’ pleas and threats were, of course, partly motivated by crass self-interest—the desire to appease angry voters, the fear of losing elections. But this was the motivation that was supposed to guide government in a representative democracy, the linkage that kept government responsive to the electorate.

For the central bank, the claims that arose randomly from popular discontent were not considered a legitimate guide to policy. That was part of the blindness, but the explanation went deeper. By its very nature, the central bank assumed that destruction was part of its purpose and, once begun, it was natural to let it continue. The process of liquidation, after all, would have no meaning if retrenchment and failure did not occur; this was the “pain” that was supposed to be therapeutic. Given that mind-set, it was easy enough for policy makers to rationalize that if a little harsh medicine would ultimately be good for everyone, then a bit more punishment ought to be even better. Thus, it was in the nature of the Federal Reserve to always go too far.

And it did so again and again in its history—telling itself each time that this was the responsible thing to do. Let “nature” take its course until all excess is purged; do not be dissuaded by the weak-willed politicians. In 1929, the Fed had clung to this self-justification disastrously. In 1982, it relented just short of the brink.

In the politics of money, there were no disinterested players, however. The participants in financial markets, the bondholders and the financial institutions that represented them, instructed the Fed relentlessly and effectively in their own behalf—demanding that the central bank squeeze the real economy still tighter in order to further enhance the value of their financial assets. The commercial bankers who advised the Fed did not, understandably, advocate any policies they thought were in the broad national interest but would be injurious for banks. The officials of the Federal Reserve attended to their own selfinterest too. For many months, the Fed was reluctant to lower interest rates, despite the evidence of economic destruction, because it was afraid of losing its own institutional “credibility.”

The “money question” was always political, notwithstanding the accepted myth of the Federal Reserve’s political independence. In the generic meaning of politics, it could not be otherwise. Whatever was decided by the Federal Reserve, some political interests would be enhanced and others would be injured. The notion that monetary policy could be disinterested—somehow separated from politics in a way that other government policies were not—was the central fallacy inherent in the central bank’s protected status. The notion that some political interests—namely, the financial markets, banks and investors—were legitimate voices in deciding the correct course for money policy—and others were not—was the central distortion of political power surrounding the Federal Reserve.

Offensive as this was to democratic principle, the practical result was in some ways worse—it produced distorted judgments by the Fed policy makers. If Volcker and his colleagues had listened more earnestly to the clamoring politicians, the Federal Reserve’s errors of excess in the liquidation might have been smaller. The economy and the financial system would not have gotten so close to the edge.

The clearest evidence that Volcker had himself misunderstood the impact of his monetary policy—that he had driven the contraction deeper than even he intended—was contained in the Federal Reserve’s own record. By its own testimony, the Federal Open Market Committee had gone too far. Each February, the FOMC was required by law to provide its operating targets and economic projections for the year. Early in 1982, the FOMC members announced the estimates of real economic growth they expected for the year and their projections ranged from a meager growth rate of only .5 percent to a more robust recovery of 3 percent. All the FOMC members, however, predicted positive real growth for 1982. Instead, the economy continued its shrinkage. Real growth was negative for 1982—minus 2.5 percent.

The Fed policy makers misjudged the extent of human dislocation and suffering their money policy would cause. The national unemployment rate reached 10.8 percent in the final quarter of 1982—whereas the Federal Open Market Committee had expected unemployment to peak between 8.25 and 9.5 percent. Several million additional people lost work and incomes as a result. The FOMC had estimated that nominal GNP would grow by 8 to 10.5 percent in 1982. In reality, it expanded by barely more than 3 percent. In sum, the Federal Reserve’s stringent monetary policy depressed the economy in 1982 much more than even the Fed planned—about five percentage points below its own forecast for nominal GNP—the equivalent of about $150 billion in unrealized economic activity. It was like an angry father spanking a child and not knowing when to stop.

In general, Federal Reserve officials defended their toughness, but some of them conceded, at least privately, that the monetary discipline had gone too far. William Poole, an academic economist who joined President Reagan’s Council of Economic Advisers in 1982 and had served many years as a monetary consultant to the Fed, described what he heard from former colleagues at the central bank: “In private conversations, the Fed people told me: ‘If we had known the severity and depth, we probably would have done it more gradually.’”

“We have a crude steering mechanism,” the vice president at one Federal Reserve Bank explained. “In retrospect, I wouldn’t have steered so close to the edge.”

The standard argument used to justify the anomaly of Federal Reserve independence was that neither Congress nor the President could be trusted with money. In the nature of electoral politics, they would always be irresponsible—incapable of restraining themselves or denying the appetites of their constituencies. The federal budget was the vivid proof. Fiscal policy was perennially out of balance and impervious to reform, expanding immoderately in good times and bad. Politicians were not expected to behave otherwise. That was why the central bank must be shielded from the hot breath of voters so it could do the responsible thing, the hard and nasty chore that politicians would not do.

But there was this countervailing reality, one that was usually left out of the argument: the Federal Reserve could be irresponsible too. Just as Congress and the President went to extremes in their budget policies, the central bank was capable of going to extremes in its pursuit of monetary discipline. The Fed demonstrated this impulse most dramatically in the course of the liquidation in 1981-1982, but it was not new behavior, unique to Paul Volcker’s regime. When it suppressed the economy, the Federal Reserve usually went too far. Given its own political objectives, the central bank was, like Congress, reluctant to restrain itself—to pursue a moderate, balanced approach to stabilizing money. Gradualism seemed awkward and unconvincing. A moderate policy risked criticism from the Fed’s own political constituencies, the bondholders and financial markets. The only way to get the job done was to do it with swift and extreme force.

The single-minded behavior of the Federal Reserve was not so different, in its own way, from the excessive behavior demonstrated by Congress and Presidents. Given the opportunity, both sides exercised their particular powers over the economy in the extreme because, for both, it was politically rewarding to do so. Elected politicians got to the “fun part” of politics—cutting taxes and increasing spending and creating new government ventures. The Federal Reserve won applause from its audience, the bondholders and associated institutions, when it imposed excessive punishment on the economy. Neither side of the governing equation—not the Fed, not the Congress and Chief Executive—was required to face the consequences of its own excess. Neither side had either the capacity or the incentive to seek balance. Neither was required to think comprehensively about managing the economy.

The governing arrangement, bizarre as it seemed, actually encouraged extreme behavior—and produced wrenching swings back and forth for the American economy. Congress knew that it could pump up the economy recklessly but would not have to answer for the destabilizing effects. The Federal Reserve would eventually come to the rescue and do the dirty work. On the other side, the Fed knew that when it did gain the opening to impose its discipline, it had an incentive to push the stringency as hard and as far as possible, expecting that, sooner or later, the democratic interests being damaged would rally in opposition and force it to retreat.

Congress could not control the brake—money and interest rates— but the Federal Reserve could not control the accelerator—the fiscal stimulus provided by federal spending and tax law. The elected government (and private players in the real economy) pushed toward giddy expansion. The central bank (supported by finance) stepped in and stopped it cold with a devastating contraction. Each power was able only to do its own thing, unchecked by the other, oblivious to the contradictions.

The contradictions grew larger and larger. Over the past two decades, it was evident that the swings back and forth induced by the government’s own economic management were becoming more violent. Each cycle produced greater extremes, regardless of which party was in power or which economic doctrine happened to be regnant. The trend moved steadily to new highs and lows—greater fiscal stimulus on one side, harsher monetary discipline on the other. Each time the combat intensified, the damage was magnified for the real interests and real people caught in the middle.

It was not one side or the other that was responsible for this instability—but the unnatural relationship itself. Financial conservatives would blame the profligate spending habits of Congress, liberal voices would blame the willful cruelty of the Fed’s high interest rates, but neither complaint addressed the full reality of the governing situation. The real malformation was the pretense that these two powerful levers of government could be rationally managed independently of each other, as though their effects did not constantly interact. The illogical arrangement guaranteed illogical behavior.

The emotional reality of this governing arrangement resembled the warped relationships present in a neurotic family. A psychologist might see the similarity even if an economist or political scientist did not. Like a family trapped in neurotic relationships, the various power elements of the government persisted in repeating obsessive patterns of behavior, playing out the same conflicts over and over again, engaging the same anger and disorder. Their behavior could be mutually destructive and often self-defeating, but they could not help themselves. Each family member clung to his assigned role, unable to alter his responses. Like a troubled family, the power centers of government could not recognize the pathological qualities in their relationships or imagine a way to extricate themselves.

The father figure in this chaotic family was, of course, the Federal Reserve. Personified by its chairman, the Fed presided uneasily over an unruly dinner table of errant children. The chairman’s very manner implied paternal authority, yet the noisy children at the table willfully ignored him. The father would instruct and scold, implore and threaten. And still the children blithely misbehaved. Congress and the Executive (and the private economy they represented) played the irrepressible adolescents who went as far as they could, tempting the heavy hand.

Finally, they would push too far. When everything seemed out of control and patience was exhausted, the father punished—and punished with brutal force. The children had known it was coming, yet they could not help themselves. They always misbehaved and they always hoped that somehow they would avoid being punished. “The chairman is the daddy,” a staff official of the FOMC had said in a different context. The metaphor of father and children was embedded in the mystique of the central bank.

In the recurring drama of excess and punishment, the children might whine and object, even lash out angrily at the father’s authority. But they did not really challenge the punishment. They had expected it. The children’s role was to misbehave and the father’s role was to inflict pain and restore order.

As a clinician might observe, the pattern of behavior seemed neurotic because nobody seemed to learn anything from these experiences. Instead, the government repeated the same extremes of disorder and punishment, and, on both sides, the responses became more exaggerated. The politicians’ impulse for unbridled economic stimulus escalated and was met by a still heavier hand from the father, a monetary contraction that was deeper and more destructive than the previous one. Though the father’s punishment became progressively more severe, it did nothing to improve the behavior of the children. None of the government’s economic managers—either at the Federal Reserve or in the elected government—seemed to know how to get off this treadmill.

The other neurotic element was more perverse: the father did not impose his discipline equally on everyone in the family. The punishment instead was aimed selectively at certain weaker members of the society. In troubled families, the phenomenon was known as scapegoating. One child in the family would be implicitly singled out by the others, both parents and siblings, as the one who would absorb the physical and psychological abuse, in behalf of the entire family. The scapegoated child usually accepted his fate, persuaded that his suffering was somehow necessary for the family’s happiness.





The economic liquidation induced by the Federal Reserve followed the same warped pattern. Given the methods of monetary discipline employed by the central bank, the economic losses naturally fell heaviest on the weakest and most vulnerable. The economic scapegoating —the disproportionate suffering by labor and smaller enterprises and, indeed, by the poorer nations of the world—was useful to the others. It allowed the father—the Federal Reserve—to exercise his authority without having to challenge genuinely powerful interests that might successfully resist. The sacrificial ritual proved gratifying for the family as a whole, so long as one was not designated as the scapegoat.

Errant children, angry father—the metaphor itself suggested the obvious way out of the government’s malformed relationships, though it was not a resolution that any important political interests, including elected politicians, were likely to embrace. The children must grow up. Normal adolescents were eventually allowed—or compelled—to attain maturity, to accept responsibility for the consequences of their actions. The institutional behavior of representative democracy was, in effect, frozen in immaturity. As long as the stern father was present to indulge their excess, to clean up their mistakes and restore order, the elected government would continue to act like children.

The status quo would most likely endure. The cycles of extremes would probably continue and even become more extreme because the arrangement served the interests of the governing institutions. Each side of the government derived a certain freedom of action from the fractured nature of the government’s economic management, an ability to pursue its own goals and evade the obligation for balance and coordination. As long as elected politicians could escape the political responsibility for cleaning up their own mess—for imposing unpopular restraints—then of course they would. As long as the central bank could exercise its power unilaterally, ignoring the collateral injustices, then the Fed had no incentive to moderate its behavior either. In a sense, neither side wished to grow up. Like a troubled family, neither could see the pathology of their behavior.

A reformed system that compelled the coordination of fiscal and monetary policies—and created direct political accountability for the results—was hardly a radical idea, except perhaps among the governing elites of America in the twentieth century. After all, most other industrial nations had such an arrangement—a governing structure in which the central bank was subservient to the elected government and the elected government ultimately had to answer for both interest rates and spending, for both growth and restraint. Political accountability and coordination could be swiftly established by simply designating the Federal Reserve as an agency of the Treasury Department, directly responsive to the wishes of the President (the idea that Paul Volcker once embraced in his college thesis). The process of economic decision making could be made more visible and more open to other voices—the moral claims of the innocent victims.15

The combat and instability would continue because its real source was the political contract struck between democracy and capital back in 1913, the implicit decision that democratic politics could not be trusted to act responsibly in the national interest. Therefore, the authority and the responsibilities of elected politicians were permanently curtailed. Put another way, the elected government was allowed to be permanently irresponsible—free to indulge its own follies and protected from the accountability by the higher authority, the nonelected central bank. The creation of the Federal Reserve represented a great retreat from democratic possibilities. The maturing of self-government was forever stunted.

PART FOUR

THE

RESTORATION OF CAPITAL





