15 A GAME OF CHICKEN


Jude Wanniski, the roving advocate for supply-side economics, was among the early winners in the great financial rally touched off by the Federal Reserve. Back in the spring, Wanniski had bought $100,000 in Treasury bonds, putting up $10,000 in cash and borrowing the rest. “I made the bet that Volcker had seen the light and the darkest days were over,” Wanniski said. He was a bit premature, but not wrong. After the Federal Reserve turned abruptly to easy money in July and the financial markets rallied explosively in August, Wanniski won his bet. Rising bond prices would give him a $30,000 profit on his $10,000 investment.

“I told my wife we can go ahead and build a new addition on the house,” he said. “And we will call it the Volcker Wing. I even put up a sign—the Volcker Wing.”1

Wanniski’s good fortune was a minor example of what was happening across the financial economy. Falling interest rates drove up prices in the stock market at a giddy pace—more than 250 points on the Dow Jones index in six weeks—accurately signaling an imminent recovery for the real economy. Falling interest rates also reinvigorated the bond market. The trading prices on outstanding bonds went up dramatically because they were now more valuable to hold. A twenty-year Treasury bond that collected 14 percent interest was automatically worth much more in the bond market now that newly issued bonds of the same maturity would be earning much lower rates. The optimism generated by new financial wealth was contagious.

“The rally was great for money managers,” said Craig Lewis of Investment Counselors of Maryland, Inc., a fund managing $500 million in investors’ assets. “We did pretty well. We made 23.1 percent in the equity area and 31 percent in bonds.”

The Spangler Group, a small Boston firm managing $60 million, enjoyed a return of 43.7 percent in 1982 from the Fed rally. “Everyone was buying CDs; it was the easiest thing to do,” said Mark Emerson. “You try to lock in rates. You try to lock in bonds. Get the money and run.

Other money managers made quick profits by buying the depressed stocks of corporations battered by the recession, confident that recovery was imminent and stocks could not go any lower. “Dire things happening in the economy present unusual opportunities,” Dean LeBaron of Batterymarch Financial Management explained.2

By early fall, the judgment of Wall Street was that the Federal Reserve had permanently reversed course, even though Paul Volcker had still not admitted it. After two and a half years of constriction, the Fed was now “reflating” the money supply—pumping liquidity into the starved financial system in order to restart the economy and avert additional failures. Financial traders worried abstractly about the long-term implications for money’s value, but they were euphoric about the immediate prospects—the recovery of profits.

“Fear vs. Greed—An Old Story Repeats Itself,” the Merrill Lynch investment-strategy advisory reported. “The stock market is torn between the fear of reflation . . . and greed for the associated earnings recovery,” Merrill Lynch said. “. . . Our scenario calls for the ‘greed’ to win out on a trend basis.”3

The markets were right. The Federal Reserve, despite disclaimers and technical evasions, was embarked on the most aggressive, sustained expansion of money in its history, with the possible exception of World War II. Over the next nine months, M-l would grow by an unprecedented $50 billion. From July to the following March, the pace of money expansion was equivalent to annual growth of 15 percent— more than double the Fed’s official targets.

Back in 1928, when Benjamin Strong dominated America’s central bank, Strong had explained that the Federal Reserve, if necessary, could always reverse a financial catastrophe simply by “flooding the street with money.” Paul Volcker’s sudden generosity in the fall of 1982 was the substantial equivalent. While Volcker did not quite “flood the street,” his response was inspired by a similar sense of urgency.

By the first of October, the Federal Reserve chairman was finally compelled to concede what he had denied for so many months. The Federal Reserve must at last abandon the monetarist operating system he had introduced three years earlier—or risk provoking a disaster. The Fed had effectively ignored its M-l rule in order to ease back in July, but now it would have to go public and admit that it was disregarding the money numbers. Volcker saw no other choice.

Despite the financial rally, the incoming statistics on real economic activity continued to look dismal. While nervous bankers negotiated with Mexico over its debt crisis, other countries were lining up with identical claims of distress. The new monthly unemployment statistics, due out in a few days, would report that U.S. unemployment was still rising—above 10 percent for the first time since before World War II.

Albert Wojnilower, chief economist at First Boston, issued a stark warning: “It is no longer altogether certain that a moderate business upturn can provide enough lift to forestall a cascading of bankruptcies.” The danger, he said, is that the Federal Reserve, after three months of easing interest rates, would now tighten again in order to contain the surging growth of M-l. “If we revert to the kind of monetary policy that prevailed prior to midyear,” Wojnilower said, “there will be a depression sooner rather than later.”4

Paul Volcker saw the portents too and delivered essentially the same message to his colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. When they met on October 5, the FOMC members immediately recognized the chairman’s sense of alarm, because, instead of waiting until last to give his own views, Volcker spoke first. He opened the discussion with a long and gloomy recital of the economic outlook. He reviewed the international debt crisis, country by country, and described his own worries about the fragility of the U.S. financial system.

The surging money numbers dictated that the Fed tighten again— but the Fed didn’t dare. The banking system, Volcker warned, would be seriously endangered if the economy did not recover soon. The only sensible course was to disregard the monetary aggregates and continue to push interest rates lower.

This was one crucial instance when Volcker and the Federal Reserve policy makers ignored the formal advice from the commercial bankers. The Federal Advisory Council, three weeks before, had recommended the opposite course. “We also continue to believe very strongly that if the money supply does in fact surge, the Federal Reserve must move promptly to resist,” the FAC reported. “Failure to resist in these circumstances would risk losing all the gains in credibility that have been won so painfully over the past few years.”5

Volcker still worried about the Fed’s credibility though. If monetarism was discarded, would the financial markets accuse him of retreat on inflation? His solution was to obscure the meaning of the policy shift as much as possible. In public, the move would be justified by technical complications—an expected distortion in M-l from the new Super-NOW accounts. The de-emphasis of M-l would be described as only temporary.

The monetarists on the FOMC knew better. If M-l was abandoned as the policy rule now, the Fed would be free of the self-imposed restraints it had obeyed since October 6, 1979. “I argued vociferously against downgrading M-l,” Lawrence Roos of the St. Louis Fed complained. “We thought it was a cop-out simply because they had lost control of M-l. When you don’t get something to work, you dump it in the wastebasket.”

In the committee rotation, Roos did not have a vote at the October meeting, but three other Reserve Bank presidents, all monetarists, dissented—Black of Richmond, Horn of Cleveland and Ford of Atlanta. They lost, 9 to 3. The FOMC majority was, if anything, even more nervous than the chairman.

There was concern about the possibility of a general domino fall in Latin America and the consequences that would have on the international financial system [Governor Partee explained]. The economy wasn’t too well. There wasn’t much sign of resurgence. There didn’t seem to be the relationship between money growth and the economic numbers you would have expected. If you are not a dyed-in-the-wool monetarist, it’s pretty hard to proceed on an act of faith when these things are happening. You could lose quite a bit—pushing the economy down even further—by being a purist.

Normally, given the Fed’s own rules of secrecy, the Federal Open Market Committee’s decision would not have become public knowledge for six weeks. This time, somehow, the news flooded Wall Street overnight and the story was promptly leaked to The Wall Street Journal. Financial markets loved it.

The Dow Jones was up 37 points the next day. Both short- and long-term interest rates fell. Bond prices jumped $25 for each $1,000 in face value, an extraordinary one-day increase. Major banks cut their prime rate to the lowest level in two years.6

Three days later, just to make sure no one missed the message, the Board of Governors reduced the Discount rate again. That meant the Fed intended short-term interest rates to fall further. In four days of furious trading, the stock market surged 115 points, reaching a new peak of 1021 on the Dow index. The financial rally would continue. Thanks to the powerful stimulus of sharply lower interest rates, the economic contraction was about to end.

President Reagan, whose own political stock had been badly tarnished by the long recession, promptly claimed vindication for his economic program. “It’s what we’ve always said,” the President declared. “The people are becoming more confident about the economy.”7

The Federal Reserve chairman was considerably more coy. In a weekend speech before a group of major corporate executives, Volcker insisted that the policy change was merely a “little detour.” When press reporters badgered him afterward, the Fed chairman complained that they were making too much of the news, trying to reduce a complex technical matter to a simple, dramatic headline. Finally, Volcker offered to write the headline for them:

Federal Reserve Policy Remains Consistent;

Reward Is Declining Interest Rates

“How do you like that headline?” Volcker asked. The Federal Reserve chairman was as evasive in announcing good news as he had been about the bad.8

The Federal Reserve was once again “zooming the money supply,” but this time Ronald Reagan did not complain. For many years, as a conservative political leader, Reagan had criticized the political cycles of monetary policy—“pulling the string” and causing recessions, then at election time “flooding the economy with money” and reviving price inflation. The President’s monetarist principles were evidently put aside now that the same thing was happening during his own tenure.

The trouble is [David Stockman explained] the President’s thinking stops in the past. He can trace the money-supply growth all the way back to the sixties, but his money-growth numbers stop in 1980. He still doesn’t realize we did the same thing to the money supply that others did. It’s the same with deficits. He doesn’t acknowledge our deficits. He can’t understand why people keep talking about his position on the deficits. He’s been against deficits for forty years. Why should anyone question that?

Reagan’s political advisers were not so opaque. Running up to the 1982 congressional elections, James Baker and his deputy, Richard Darman, leaned on Volcker repeatedly to keep cutting the Discount rate—which they hoped would also cut Republican losses in the November elections. When Volcker refused to make a final Discount reduction two weeks before election day, Baker was furious. The stock market fell sharply and overnight polling showed an abrupt drop in Republican prospects. Republicans lost twenty-six seats in the House and some fingered the Fed chairman. “That’s when the White House said, ‘We’ve got to get rid of Volcker,’” Wanniski related. “ ‘This guy isn’t going to play ball in ’84 when the President is running.’”9

The President developed his own eclectic explanation for what had happened to the economy. The recession could have been avoided entirely, Reagan confided to his associates, if he had never consented to postponing the effective date of the supply-side tax cuts back in 1981. “Reagan still believes this recession wouldn’t have happened if the tax cuts were not delayed and the economy wasn’t pushed down on its knees,” Stockman said. “His view is that we wouldn’t have had to go through this at all—or have all these high deficits.”

In other words, the President continued to believe in the original logic of his economic recovery program, namely, that the government could somehow tighten money to break inflation while it simultaneously stimulated economic growth with tax cuts. Five quarters of deep recession had persuaded most everyone else, including the President’s own advisers, to abandon this fantastic logic.

On the other hand, Reagan also blamed the Federal Reserve for overdoing it. “If that string hadn’t been pulled for so long and so hard, we might not have had the depth of recession that we’ve had,” he told one audience. His statement was indisputable, but it conveniently overlooked the fact that the President himself—at two crucial junctures in the spring of 1981 and the winter of 1982—had personally pressured the Fed to tighten its control of money. When the Federal Reserve obliged, it inevitably made the recession worse.10

Monetarists in the Reagan Administration voiced the same revisionist criticism of Volcker’s management. Treasury Under Secretary Beryl Sprinkel, echoed by Secretary Regan and others, complained after the fact that the Administration had wanted a “gradual” reduction of money growth spread over several years, but instead the Fed had done it swiftly and drastically, causing more economic damage than was necessary. Sprinkel’s complaint seemed especially gratuitous. After all, he and the other monetarists had persistently heckled the central bank to be as tough as possible in slowing down money growth. “Gradual reduction,” Sprinkel had said himself back in 1981, would be considered the minimum goal.11

The monetarists, both inside and outside the Reagan Administration, faced a more fundamental contradiction in their position: their grand theory of the economy was no longer working.12 Their advice was no longer heeded by the political counselors who ultimately made the policy decisions in the Reagan White House. Political advisers like James Baker had learned from hard experience not to trust the monetarist forecasts or to follow policy recommendations that simply invited higher interest rates and more pain.

In his private memos following the 1982 election, Beryl Sprinkel persisted in sounding the same alarm.

A slowdown of money growth is crucial to a sustained, noninflationary expansion [Sprinkel warned the White House]. Without it, rising interest rates are the inevitable result, once inflationary expectations are aggravated; the positive gains on inflation will be lost and the price we paid for those gains, by enduring a long and severe recession, will be squandered.

. . . The economic and political implications are sobering.

This time, however, the Federal Reserve chairman was not summoned to the Oval Office to be scolded by the President. On the contrary, the Fed actually accelerated money growth so that, in one four-week period, M-l expanded at a startling annual rate of 27 percent. The President’s men did not object. The Federal Reserve was abandoning its monetarist principles, but so was the Reagan White House.

The White House senior officials were wise to ignore the monetarists, because none of their dire warnings came true. The most visible public embarrassment was reserved for the father of modern monetarism—Milton Friedman. The acerbic little professor would announce two stark predictions for the economy in subsequent months and both would be spectacularly wrong. First, Friedman declared, a new run-up of price inflation, perhaps approaching double digits, was now inevitable in the next year or so, given the explosive money growth the Federal Reserve was allowing. (Instead, inflation would decline even further.) Next, when Friedman analyzed a slowdown that developed in M-l growth late in 1983, he boldly predicted that a recession would unfold in the election year of 1984. (That didn’t happen either.)

“Now I was wrong, absolutely wrong,” Friedman said of his predicted recession. “And I have no good explanation as to why I was wrong.”13

William Poole offered an explanation for the gross miscalculations by himself and Milton Friedman and the other monetarists. “I think it’s fair to say,” Poole suggested, “that those of us who have developed strong theories tried to fit the world into the theory rather than the other way around.”

If the Federal Reserve was no longer adhering to the money numbers, it would now watch everything—the old eclectic approach that monetarists and markets had scorned. The new approach gave the chairman maximum discretion to be flexible. When asked, Volcker would explain that the Federal Reserve was taking many things into account and there was no single guide to monetary policy. The Fed was withdrawing once again into the mystique of central banking.

For practical purposes, however, the Fed’s intentions were now much easier to read. Interest rates were, unambiguously, the thing to watch. More specifically, the financial markets swiftly recognized that the Discount rate—the traditional tool of monetary policy long dismissed as merely symbolic—was now the key indicator of the Fed’s decisions. With rates falling, the Discount rate was the effective “floor price” for short-term borrowing, and, save for brief exceptions, the Fed would not allow the Federal Funds rate to trade below its Discount rate (otherwise banks would have no reason to borrow at the Discount window and the Fed would lose its leverage over credit conditions). So Fed watchers watched the Discount decisions with a new intensity.

“The approach used in late 1982 tended to focus market attention on the Discount rate,” the Open Market Desk in New York acknowledged. “Sentiment waxed bullish or bearish on prospects for such cuts, usually with each cut generating expectations of further cuts.”

Fed officials vigorously denied it, but many money traders assumed the central bank had simply returned to its old pre-1979 operating style—pegging interest rates, adding or withdrawing bank reserves in order to keep the Federal Funds rate at a specified level. William Poole, the monetary expert at the CEA, observed the new pattern. “Starting in about July 1982 the Federal Funds rate became smooth once again, both day to day and especially month to month,” Poole noted in a White House memorandum.14

After the election, the Federal Reserve Board resumed its downward pressure on interest rates, cutting the Discount rate another half percent on November 19. Other interest rates, short-term and long-term, followed in descent.

On December 13, the board voted another reduction, cutting the Discount to 8.5 percent. It was the seventh reduction in five months —but it was also the last one. This time, the bond market objected. Long-term bond rates, instead of declining further in step with the Fed’s easing of short-term rates, turned around and increased slightly. The bond market seemed to be telling the Fed: That’s enough. Don’t push interest rates any lower.

“If the markets think a Discount cut is inflationary,” Henry Wallich explained, “then they will keep interest rates up. As we approached the last Discount cut, the markets were telling us that they didn’t like too much ease.”

“No question, we got ahead of the markets,” said Preston Martin, the new vice chairman of the board.

The Federal Reserve Board got the message. It was a striking and significant example of how influential bond investors could be in determining the government’s monetary policy. Interest rates were still abnormally high, but the Discount rate would be lowered no further. Despite continuing pleas from politicians, despite continuing strains on the real economy, the Federal Reserve Board would keep the Discount rate frozen for the next fifteen months.

By January, a dozen or more debtor nations were lining up at the same window, seeking the sort of relief that a business corporation sought when it filed for a Chapter 11 bankruptcy. In this instance, the bankruptcy referee was the International Monetary Fund, assisted directly by the authority of the Federal Reserve, and, one by one, the IMF negotiated “work out” plans for the failed debtors. The rescheduling schemes would prevent default and allow the countries to keep going, but, like any bankrupted borrower, the sovereign nations were compelled to accept the bankers’ terms.

Mexico borrowed $3.7 billion from the IMF and another $5 billion from its creditors, the major multinational banks, and rolled over the principal due on its old debt. In exchange, the Mexican government accepted the IMF’s terms for austerity: it must reduce its imports drastically as well as domestic government spending in order to build up the reserves to keep up the interest payments on its growing indebtedness.

Brazil borrowed $4.6 billion from the IMF and needed another $3 billion from the banks and accepted similar conditions. Argentina received $1.6 billion from the IMF and a like amount from the private banks. Venezuela, Chile, Peru and a long list of others submitted to similar arrangements. Each accepted international supervision of its domestic economy in order to avoid the trauma of failure and loss of access to international finance.

The process of debt rescheduling for the less-developed nations was not essentially different from the refinancing plans that commercial banks had worked out for such major corporate debtors as International Harvester when it approached failure the year before. Only the stakes were many times larger, especially for the banks. Just as Harvester was too big to fail, too deeply in debt, so were the leading borrowers of Latin America. If any of them was allowed to default, the instant write-off of billions in loan losses would bring down many of the largest banks in the country. In the same sense, however, the rescheduling of old debts did not solve the fundamental problems facing Latin-American debtors any more than it had solved International Harvester’s. The debtors were simply given more time to work their way out—permitted to borrow more now at prevailing interest rates in the hope that future economic growth would eventually ameliorate their debt burdens.

Month by month, Paul Volcker was at the center of the crisis management, lending his imprimatur to the IMF terms, pressuring both the debtor nations and the private banks to complete the deals. He dispatched aides to foreign capitals to bargain privately over snarled agreements. He met with bank executives to keep the process on track. Week by week, virtually every country became in turn a momentary subject of crisis. But neither the Fed nor the IMF, the debtor nations nor the money-center banks, could allow the process to break down. If one “work out” failed, then all might swiftly become unraveled and the fragile economic recovery would be interrupted by a global financial crisis.

While Volcker and his counterpart at the IMF, Jacques de La-rosiere, succeeded in preventing any ruptures, the sense of progress was in large part illusory. In general, the debt-ridden nations were borrowing billions simply to keep up with the interest payments coming due on their old loans. The due dates on the principal were pushed further and further into the future.

The implicit danger in this process was stated candidly by the Fed’s resident authority on international finance, Governor Henry Wallich. Wallich warned: “Situations where a country might begin to rely on rescheduling for the indefinite future should be guarded against. Rescheduling then could become a Ponzi game in which the banks would be lending the borrower the interest so as not to have to treat the ever-mounting loan as nonperforming.”15 Wallich had delivered his warning to bankers back in 1981 before the debt crisis became a visible reality. He did not repeat the point once the reschedulings became commonplace, though, as a practical matter, many of the arrangements did resemble the circular illusions of a “Ponzi game.”

The alternative was unthinkable, at least to Paul Volcker and the Federal Reserve. They could not let the debtors default and banks fail. On the other hand, they could not bring themselves to propose more fundamental solutions. In theory at least, the creditor nations of the world, including especially the United States, could have confronted the international debt crisis more forthrightly by acknowledging that the Third World nations were hopelessly overburdened and that general debt relief must be arranged. This would have required immediate losses all around—by the borrowing nations and by the commercial banks that did the original lending. The industrial nations, likewise, would then have to advance major funding to the IMF or the World Bank so that one of the international lending agencies could underwrite a long-term restructuring of the bad debt—writing off the worthless loans at a loss and spreading out the rest of the debt burden over forty or fifty years.

Former Governor Philip Coldwell, now retired from the Fed and serving as a financial consultant to the Argentine government, was among those convinced that Volcker and the others were simply postponing the inevitable—an international bailout of vast proportions. “Brazil, Argentina and Mexico have just put off the day of the next crisis,” Coldwell said. “They’re not going to pay off this debt. There is no way the export-income surplus in those countries can increase enough to pay off that debt. Where do they get the money to pay— unless you cut the interest rates by 50 percent?”

A general write-off and long-term restructuring would impose immediate costs on everyone, but they also offered a major advantage for everyone—improved economic prospects for the debtor nations and their trading partners, particularly the United States. As long as the IMF imposed its austerity plans, the LDC debtors must curtail their imports, which, in effect, meant closing major markets for American agriculture and manufacturing.

Like it or not, Americans were interdependent with the world far more than they wished to acknowledge. Major sectors of the American economy could not return to their own full prosperity as long as Latin America was held to an austere financial regimen. In the Midwest, as they figured out the connection, farmers from Iowa complained that they were losing overseas sales for their grain so that banks in New York could collect their interest payments.

Volcker sternly discouraged any talk of debt forgiveness, however, or even concessions on interest rates. “We can’t force terms on the banks without creating another crisis of confidence,” he argued. The banking system was still recovering from the traumatic fissures of 1982, and the Federal Reserve chairman felt obligated, above all else, to protect the system.

In a sense, the Fed was trying to clean up its own mess. The global recession induced by the Federal Reserve had collapsed Latin economies in the first place, rendered their swollen debt burdens unsustainable and put the major banks at risk. It was perhaps the gravest price that the world—and the United States—would pay for Volcker’s zealous assault on inflation. If the Fed chairman had managed the transition more gradually, if he had not steered so close to the edge, the damage to Third World debtors would have been much less severe. Both sovereign nations and their bankers would have had more time to adjust. By driving them to the wall, Volcker was indeed partly responsible for the global dilemma of bankrupt nations. He was obliged to attend.

The same bruised condition applied generally throughout the domestic economy. Debtors, whether they were farmers or home buyers or major corporations, were wounded so deeply by the long recession, it would take years for many of them to recover and many would not make it. The domestic loan failures did not, however, threaten the banking system with the same concentrated force as the foreign debt, and the Federal Reserve did not feel constrained to manage the “work out” for them.

Most Americans had forgotten, if they ever knew, that the United States faced a debt crisis of its own many times during the nineteenth century. Ambitious developers, including state and local governments, would borrow excessively from the banks of Europe to finance railroads or other expansion projects. When ventures failed, the loans were defaulted, sometimes on a massive scale. Vast fortunes in borrowed capital from Britain and the Continent were lost on the American frontier, written off as uncollectible. The recurring scandals and disgrace of default did not inhibit long-term growth for the young Republic or ruin its international credit rating. But, whenever default or forgiveness was suggested for the Third World debts, the idea seemed to outrage Americans, now that they were the creditors.

A larger solution was, in any case, politically impossible. Congress was now angry at the major banks for their gross overcommitments to foreign lending. Despite the deregulation rhetoric of recent years, senators and representatives were pushing the Fed to impose tougher controls on banks. In that hostile environment, neither Volcker nor anyone else could plausibly propose a vast bailout that would require commitments of tens of billions of dollars.

Indeed, as the IMF’s lending increased, the Reagan Administration was compelled to ask Congress to authorize an additional U.S. contribution of $8.4 billion to the international fund and the measure was bitterly opposed by both liberals and conservatives. They argued, alternately, that the financial package was a blatant bailout for either the money-center banks or for profligate foreign governments or both. Only intense lobbying by the Administration and the Federal Reserve chairman finally persuaded Congress to approve.

In substance, the critics were correct. The new money from the IMF would be transferred by Telex to Buenos Aires, Rio de Janeiro or Mexico City. But then the money would be swiftly sent back to the creditor banks in New York and elsewhere. The apparent soundness of both debtors and creditors was maintained, but in the process the debtors were drawn still deeper in debt.

A genuine solution, Philip Coldwell predicted, would not be acceptable, either to bankers or politicians, until the consequences of the LDC debt reached a sufficiently frightening level of crisis—when the “Ponzi game” broke down and everyone was forced to acknowledge it. Like all illusions, this one might continue for quite a long time, perhaps many years, but it could also collapse abruptly at any time, shattered by random events.

“The way out of this thing is a shift in the way we treat the LDC debt,” Coldwell argued. “The banks would have to take a big hit on their balance sheets, but then it’s over. If you give them a definitive hit, then they could say it’s behind us. If you get down to a crisis stage, the banks would accept that. They would have no choice.”

In the meantime, however, Volcker and his international aides worked assiduously to protect the earnings of the banks, particularly the money-center banks, which were most exposed. In the negotiations over new loans, Volcker usually supported the bankers in their persistent refusal to make any concessions on interest rates. The Fed also took care to instruct its bank examiners to treat the huge portfolios of questionable LDC loans with special solicitude. If the rules were applied too strictly, major banks might be confronted with huge loan write-offs that would wipe out their capital.

The central bank, as regulator and protector, had worked itself into a compromising position. On the one hand, the Fed was trying to gradually extricate the largest banks from their overexposure and preaching sterner discipline for the future. On the other hand, the Fed was bending the banking standards and pressuring hundreds of other wary bankers to make new loans they regarded as dubious.

The survival of the most important money-center banks depended on keeping the rescheduling deals afloat, but dozens of smaller regional banks, with less exposure, wanted out. They were prepared to write off their losses and stop lending to Mexico and the others. Why throw good money after bad? When these bankers balked at committing more money to the new loan packages, they were pressured by the major banks. If that didn’t work, they received a friendly call from the president of the local Federal Reserve Bank, urging them to reconsider.

In most cases, the persuasion succeeded, but it also implied an unstated guarantee by the government. The Federal Reserve was coaxing bankers into making new loans that the bankers considered imprudent. Did that commit the Fed to make sure that none of these banks suffered for doing what Volcker had urged upon them? Karin Lissakers, an international finance expert at the Carnegie Endowment, described the risk: “The problem is that by the time the crisis ends, the regulatory authorities may be so deeply compromised by the concessions that they have made to the banks that there is no return.”16

Volcker, nevertheless, would make slow, steady progress on what he regarded as the primary objective—getting the major money-center banks out of their precarious position. Citibank, Manufacturers Hanover, Morgan and the rest continued rolling over old loans, but their LDC exposure gradually declined as a proportion of their overall portfolios. The major new lending to the troubled nations was now coming from the public agencies—the IMF and the World Bank—and that allowed the commercial banks to moderate their own new commitments. As public sources assumed more of the risk, the largest private banks were able to slowly edge back from the brink.

For the debtors, however, the strategy required a long, bleak future. The IMF’s austere conditions not only depressed standards of living for Latin populations, but the nations were compelled to devote most of their export earnings to their debts, so that little or nothing could be invested in economic development for the future. Just as Iowa farmers could no longer sell their grain to Latin America, working citizens of Mexico and Argentina and other countries could no longer look forward to steady improvement in their economic well-being.

“For the first time in the life-span of a majority of the population,” Jesus Silva Herzog, the Mexican finance minister, lamented, “we are going to have a deterioration in the standard of living for most of the people of the country.”17

Governor Charles Partee expressed the same regret. “Now, you can’t convince anybody to make a loan to the LDCs,” Partee said, “and it’s extremely difficult for these countries. There’s almost nothing they can do to open access to new credit. So they are being ground down every day by the payments they have to make and they have no chance of getting the new loans that would help their growth.”

In Rio de Janeiro, middle-class citizens looted supermarkets, carting off free groceries in a brief and futile rebellion. Brazilians had suffered a. 12 percent decline in real per capita disposable income since the beginning of the global recession. In Buenos Aires, amid wildcat strikes and other political unrest, the president of Argentina’s central bank was briefly arrested when he returned home from the annual IMF meeting in Washington. He was accused of betraying “national sovereignty” by yielding to the international bankers.18

Representative Jim Leach, an Iowa Republican, spoke for the American farmers who were losing export sales:

If there is any scandal at the Fed, it’s that they let down on their regulatory function by letting the banks make all these loans in the first place. It’s one of the great banking scandals of the century. Yet the Fed now has a monetary policy that holds the people who made the mistakes harmless. It protects the banks in New York at the expense of the Midwest. Someone is paying for the foreign-lending debacle, but it isn’t the banks.19

These were empty expressions of protest, however. Neither the human distress of deepening poverty in the less-developed countries nor the complaints from American politicians would deflect Volcker and the other managers of international finance from their strategy: to help the banks get well. For the foreseeable future, a dozen nations or more would be held hostage to the past, paying singularly for the mistakes that they and their bankers had made together.

The renewed American prosperity unfolding in 1983 was an utterly different world from the economy that had existed four years earlier. The Federal Reserve had turned the tables on virtually every transaction in American enterprise. The government, in effect, had created new terms for every contract—imposing new conditions for labor’s wage settlements and for farm loans, for a family’s credit cards and home mortgage, for investments in oil and real estate and shipping, for bonds and stocks, bank CDs and money-market mutual funds. The Fed would continue to steer the economy month to month, but now everything was flowing in the direction it wanted.

The fundamental reversal was in the advantage between lenders and borrowers of every kind. The debtors, from families buying a home to businesses borrowing for new machinery, had benefited powerfully from rising prices—paying back their loans in cheapened dollars. Now it was the creditors’ turn. Old debts, contracted when inflation was running high and expected to continue, would now be paid back in “hard” dollars—money that not only retained its value but actually increased in purchasing power as prices continued to fall.

The new terms were visible everywhere, though hardly noticed in general. James McGrady, an Exxon station owner from Baltimore, was paying off a 20 percent loan, contracted when inflation was still in double digits. But now inflation was below 4 percent and the difference would have to come out of the real returns from his business.20 The implicit subsidy that inflation had provided business borrowers was now reversed.

Young couples who were new homeowners felt the same squeeze in their monthly mortgage payments. When they bought their house, a mortgage at 12 percent or even higher sounded scary, but it was actually a good investment if price inflation was running at 10 percent or above and the couple’s wage income was steadily rising too. Inflation would inexorably shrink the burden of their monthly mortgage payments, both in real terms and as a share of their incomes. Meanwhile, the market value of their home would steadily appreciate, accumulating equity for them. But, now that inflation had fallen below 4 percent, their 12 percent mortgage was suddenly a terrible deal. They were paying a real interest rate of 8 percent or higher—unheard of in previous generations.

For decades, the process of homeownership combined with inflation had effectively redistributed wealth from creditors to debtors, across a broad spectrum of citizens. As a practical matter, this was the only way that millions of middle-class families ever managed to accumulate any real wealth over the course of their working lives. When inflation ended, the wealth redistribution was stopped. Now, instead of shrinking, the real cost of the couple’s home steadily increased—and, across the nation, housing values stopped rising.

In gross social terms, the “money question” now benefited the “savers”—the 45 percent of American families that were net creditors in financial wealth—at the expense of everyone else. In general, this meant older citizens gained at the expense of the young. Established wealth and enterprise were favored over the smaller and untested ventures. The reversal particularly benefited the minority who owned the bulk of accumulated capital, the 10 percent of Americans who owned 86 percent of the net financial wealth.

For investors deciding where to put their capital, the tables were also turned in a fundamental way: financial assets now flourished and real assets lost their value. Because the dollar was now stabilized and hardening in value, any investment in financial paper, denominated in dollars, was now becoming much more secure and profitable. For the same reasons, investments in tangible assets like land, farm commodities, suburban houses, factories and machines, or oil were now the losers. A harder dollar would buy larger and larger quantities of real things. This basic equation would drive investment choices through the decade: put your money in bonds or other financial instruments, not in new factories, if you want to reap the largest returns.

A study by Salomon Brothers, entitled “What a Difference a Decade Makes,” charted the reversed fortunes between real assets and financial assets. In the 1980s, bonds became the most profitable place to store wealth, averaging a return of 20.9 percent. Stocks were the second best, averaging 16.5 percent. Both had suffered negative returns during the inflationary 1970s.

Meanwhile, the tangible things of the economy, from housing to commodities to real manufactured goods, became the losing investments. Their prices were flat or falling because of oversupply; their value was no longer enhanced by general inflation. After discounting inflation, investors in farmland suffered a negative real return of 6.2 percent in the 1980s. Oil investments lost an average of 15.4 percent —virtually wiping out all that oil had gained in the preceding decade.

This new dimension, though largely unrecognized, was launching a perverse new dynamic in the American economy—a kind of rolling liquidation that continued long after the general recession had ended. It was aimed selectively at real goods—suppressing prices and wages. Farmers, oil producers, organized labor—these and other sectors confronted continuing surpluses of whatever they had to sell. The oversupply would continue to depress their products long after the economic expansion was under way and booming—and force continuing failure for the producers of real assets.

The negative returns for real goods severely complicated the debt problems for their producers. As the price of their commodities fell, the value of the collateral on which they had borrowed—whether it was farmland or oil reserves—was automatically downgraded too. Yet they must keep borrowing to stay in business and keep repaying their loans in “harder” dollars. Their real debt burden was increasing while their capacity to borrow was shrinking.

That reversed circumstance was the core equation for what became popularly known as the “farm crisis”—an inexorable squeeze between prices and credit that would drive tens of thousands of American farmers to the wall. These failing farmers were widely described as “inefficient,” but nothing had changed about their efficiency except the price they received for their output and the price they paid for their loans.

When producers were caught in such a squeeze, the natural response was to dump more real assets on the marketplace—land or wheat or oil or even idle machines and factories—in an effort to keep up with the shortfall on debts. The desperate selling of more goods, of course, only added to the glut and depressed prices further.

Once this rolling liquidation was under way on a broad front and feeding on itself, the various markets for real assets would keep it going, more or less on their own. As long as unemployment remained high, labor unions would be compelled to accept massive cutbacks in their wage agreements. As long as world agricultural markets were glutted, farmers produced more and sold it for less. Homeowners, having enjoyed robust appreciation in their homes’ market value for many years, now noticed that neighborhood real-estate prices were no longer rising, but, in most cities, declining.

The era of inflation was over. To insure that it did not return, the Federal Reserve had only to manage the economy in such a way that the surpluses in goods and labor and productive capacity continued. So long as the surpluses glutted markets, the rolling liquidation of real assets would continue and their prices would be held in check.

Most Americans seemed grateful for the new conditions. Certainly, they did not identify themselves as losers because they were homeowners or workers or borrowers. The reversed fortunes between the economy of finance and the economy of real goods was hardly noticeable to average citizens. What they saw was that the frenzy of price inflation was gone. People were going back to work. A sense of good feeling was spreading through the marketplace.

“The long nightmare of runaway inflation,” the President declared, “is now behind us.”

Ronald Reagan’s ebullient optimism seemed to be confirmed daily in the economic news. The recovery began slowly, amid many forecasts that it would be weak and unsustainable, but by March the new economic activity was gathering real momentum. The President was triumphant.

“Recession is giving way to a rainbow of recovery, reflecting a renaissance in enterprise,” he announced to a San Francisco business audience. “America is on the mend. . . . Katy, bar the door. We’re on our way back.”

Ronald Reagan was on the way back too. For more than a year, the President’s approval rating in public-opinion polls had fallen steadily as the rate of unemployment increased. By January of 1983, one month after the peak unemployment of 10.8 percent, Reagan’s popular support hit a new low point in the Gallup poll—35 percent. In trial heats with potential Democratic challengers for 1984, Reagan lost to both Walter Mondale, the former Vice President, and Senator John Glenn of Ohio. The political talk of Washington was about the likelihood of yet another one-term President.

The economic news turned politics around. In February, when unemployment began to subside, the President’s popularity rating suddenly shot up 5 percent. His standing would continue to improve steadily thereafter. Reagan’s political fortunes recovered in an almost perfect inverse ratio to the falling unemployment rate and his reelection prospects brightened accordingly. A second term for Ronald Reagan would depend almost entirely on whether the robust economic recovery continued.

“Something exciting is happening,” the President told an audience of Oregon lumber executives. “You can feel it in Klamath Falls and, I think, in towns all across America. ... I just left a lumber mill that has reopened and I can tell you the whir of the machinery there was music to my ears.”21

The popularity of the Federal Reserve chairman was not measured by the Gallup poll, but it was clear that Paul Volcker’s stature was also vastly enhanced by the economic news, especially among elite opinion makers. After all, Volcker had done what he had promised. Inflation was now subdued. The New York Times likened him to a matador, skillfully evading political attackers. His crisis management of the LDC debt problems was compared to St. George battling the dragon.22

A Gallup survey of major corporate executives found that they ranked Volcker much more highly than they did the President—51 percent expressed great confidence in the Fed chairman, compared to only 27 percent for Ronald Reagan. Volcker was unloved among small-business men, however. Only 20 percent of them trusted him to do the right thing.23

The Wall Street Journal expressed a widely held assessment of the Fed chairman—if it were not for Volcker’s leadership, things might have turned out much worse. “Among all top U.S. officials and policy-making agencies, Mr. Volcker and the Federal Reserve Board have shouldered the greatest burden in dealing with international financial turmoil,” the Journal said. “They have undertaken this role largely by default, given the inexperience of Administration officials. . . .”24

One important group did not share this enthusiasm for Paul Volcker —the President’s own senior advisers. Treasury Secretary Donald Regan’s antagonism was well known. Regan had frequently criticized Volcker’s management in public and ordered up an intimidating Treasury study on the Fed’s independence. He assured associates that Volcker would not be reappointed when his term as chairman expired in August. What was less well known outside the White House was that presidential counselor Edwin Meese and James Baker, the chief of staff, felt much the same way. Baker resented Volcker’s stubbornness in drawing out the recession so severely. He was rankled when Volcker refused to oblige with another Discount cut just before the 1982 election. But, fundamentally, Baker shared Regan’s questions about the Federal Reserve’s independent political status.

There’s an awful lot of power there held by unelected people [an Administration official explained]. That’s an awful lot of power with darn little accountability. I’m not sure it’s good for a President to be held responsible for monetary policy when he has no control over it. There’s a powerful counterargument which is that you don’t want politicians messing around with monetary policy for their own benefit, but maybe there’s a middle ground somewhere. If the President controlled monetary policy, at least you would have someone accountable for it. After all, the President does have to answer to the public.

Jude Wanniski, who talked regularly with Administration insiders, dined one evening with Volcker and informed the Fed chairman of his bleak prospects. “I told him he had very low chances of being reappointed,” Wanniski said, “because he had incurred the wrath of Baker and the White House politicos and they were nervous about ’84 and the President’s re-election. They had the idea Volcker would not be a team player. They wanted their own man at the Fed—someone who would be inhibited from tightening at the wrong moment.”25

In Congress, however, Volcker enjoyed a new sense of admiration, even deference. Some critics persisted, but generally members of Congress were respectful, including Republican leaders like Senator Howard Baker who had been so critical during the recession. Paul Volcker had done a nasty, difficult job. He was managing the fragile global financial situation. Meanwhile, the Administration seemed in disarray on its own fiscal problems. The earlier agitation for reforming the Fed simply evaporated.

Volcker was confident enough of his own status to loosen up a bit in public, even joking about his reputation as the hardhearted central banker. “Central bankers are brought up pulling the legs off ants,” he quipped at one Washington party.

The President and the Federal Reserve chairman shared in the warming glow of public opinion. Ronald Reagan took personal credit for halting inflation and, though the task was actually done by the Federal Reserve, his claim had some merit. The President, on the whole, had supported Volcker’s stringent money policy through most of the recession, even if he disowned any blame for the resulting pain.

Volcker, for his part, thought that the Fed’s job was probably made easier by Ronald Reagan’s unshakable optimism. Through the dark months, the President had kept telling the people to keep the faith, that there were better times ahead. Sure enough, he was right. The priest and the prince, presiding jointly as public figures, had accomplished their sacred task, the restoration of money. Their miraculous powers were celebrated by a grateful populace.

Yet Ronald Reagan and Paul Volcker were also in a fundamental collision of purposes. Now that the recovery was under way, the President and the Federal Reserve chairman wanted different things from the American economy. Their separate economic policies would pull in contradictory directions. This deeper struggle was hardly visible to the general public and never fully acknowledged by the principals, but it would be the core drama of governance for ensuing years—an epic contest of wills between those who determined fiscal policy and those who controlled monetary policy.

“A game of chicken,” as Neil Wallace, an economist at the Minneapolis Fed, aptly called it, played between the two sides of the government. Who would blink first? Who would back off? The President and Congress, who had enacted the highly stimulative $200 billion deficits? Or Paul Volcker, who had vowed to prevent the economy from accelerating into another inflationary run-up? Volcker pleaded with the White House and Congress to retreat, to make major reductions in their deficits. The Reagan Administration complained, meanwhile, that monetary policy must not get in the way of the robust economy. The two formulations were in fundamental conflict, as economist Thomas J. Sargent of the University of Minnesota explained:

The Federal Reserve [has] resolved to stick to a policy that is feasible only if the budget is approximately balanced, while Congress and the Executive Branch together have determined prospects for taxes and spending that are feasible only if the central bank eventually becomes passive and accommodative. With such mutually infeasible prospects, all that is certain is that one side or the other must eventually give in. Outside parties are thrust into the uncertain position of betting on which side in the game of chicken will eventually capitulate and on how and when.26

For innocent bystanders, this contest was much more serious than a political spectacle of divided government. Many citizens and businesses would be punished directly because of the fiscal-monetary collision while others would profit from it—for the visible edge of the conflict was interest rates. The Federal Reserve, blaming market pressures created by the federal deficits, would keep interest rates at extraordinary levels, adding to the burdens of the debtors, foreclosing claims of future economic growth. Whenever there were complaints, the Fed pointed at Congress and the President. Interest rates, it insisted, could not be lowered until the deficits were reduced. The central bank would not moderate its economic policy until the President and Congress yielded first on theirs.

Despite what Fed officials suggested and many politicians assumed to be true, the persistence of high interest rates did not flow ineluctably from the size of the federal deficits. The price of money was naturally influenced by the demand for credit and, obviously, burgeoning federal deficits increased that demand. But, ultimately, the Fed could bring down the price, if it wished, by increasing the supply. In order to safeguard its control over prices, it chose not to do so. Whether its reasons were sound or flawed, wise or wrongheaded, should have been the question for debate because the high interest rates were not, as so many assumed, dictated by impersonal market forces.

The clearest proof of this was visible in what actually happened to interest rates during Paul Volcker’s regime—the price of money moved up or down quite independently of what was happening to the federal deficits. Interest rates rose drastically when the deficits were still modest. Later on, interest rates would fall dramatically, even though the deficits were still expanding, reaching record dimensions. If interest rates were simply driven by the market pressures of deficit spending, this could not have occurred. Logically, it had to be something else—or someone else. The “someone else” was Paul Volcker and the policy makers of the Fed.

The contradictory ingredients had been present in the government’s macroeconomic policies since 1981, but the situation was now wholly different. The economy was growing again, driven by the tax cuts and huge federal deficits. If the Federal Reserve simply accommodated this powerful fiscal stimulus, it feared it would be acquiescing to a resurgence of the old malady, price inflation. Yet, if the Fed restrained too zealously, it would ruin the good times.

The news media focused intensely, almost exclusively, on only one side of this conflict—the continuing political back and forth over spending and taxes and budget deficits. The press covered the congressional budget debates and the President’s reactions in exhaustive daily detail, but in fact the endless arguments between Congress and the White House did not substantially alter the government’s fiscal policy. Congress would enact a series of secondary tax increases and additional spending cuts during 1983 and 1984, but the general thrust of fiscal policy remained the same—headed toward annual deficits of $200 billion or more.

The press did not pay much attention to the real game—the Federal Reserve’s continuing dominance over management of the American economy. By now, probably, many citizens grasped that Volcker and the Fed had had something to do with the recent recession (People magazine had said so). But very few appreciated that the Fed remained in control, now that recession was past and the nation was in recovery. This new chapter was a more subtle exercise of the. Fed’s power, but also more provocative. Usually, the central bank retreated to a passive role when economic expansions got under way, accommodating the revival of prosperity. This time, the Fed would hang on to its hegemony. It would continue to set the terms for the rest of the government—serving on, unseen, as “economic czar” for the nation.

With the managers of fiscal policy in a stalemate of their own making, the managers of monetary policy held the government’s only active lever over the economy. Operating with far less public scrutiny, the Fed would manipulate the rise and fall of the economy on its own. The fate of the Reagan recovery would depend not on the President’s decisions or the noisy budget debates but on how Paul Volcker and his colleagues decided to counter the stimulative impact of fiscal policy.

Judging from the past, the Federal Reserve could be expected to lose this contest. That, at least, had usually been the outcome in previous decades. Whenever the federal government grossly accelerated its deficit spending, whether in peacetime or in war, a dramatic run-up of price inflation eventually followed. Economists argued over why this was so, but the linkage was well established in experience. Apparently, the financial markets expected the Fed to lose the struggle. Their skepticism was expressed in the continuing high level of interest rates—investors demanding a higher return now because they expected their dollar assets to be watered down by inflation later. The Fed tacitly legitimized the markets’ fears in December when it stopped lowering the Discount rate, accepting the investors’ judgment that interest rates must remain at a precautionary level.

While theoretically they were separate functions, monetary policy directly felt the pressures from fiscal policy, in part, because the central bank had a historic obligation to assist the executive branch when it borrowed money. When the Treasury sold bonds, borrowing billions to finance the federal deficits, the government’s new debt issue could never be allowed to fail. The financial markets must be able to absorb the new debt paper. Otherwise, the United States government would be profoundly embarrassed before the world and its unassailable creditworthiness suddenly in question. The Fed’s monetary officials were responsible for insuring “orderly markets” for government securities, and they regularly coordinated with Treasury debt managers when huge new offerings were made, so the bonds would be sold expeditiously and interest rates would not go berserk.

One way the Fed could insure successful financings by Treasury was simply to guarantee that there was plenty of money available in private hands. If the Fed pumped sufficient liquidity into the banking system, lenders would be able to buy up all the new U.S. debt paper and still be able to serve the competing claims of other borrowers— private business and consumers who also needed credit. As larger and larger federal deficits forced Treasury to borrow more and more, the pressure on the Fed to accommodate naturally grew stronger. If the Fed refused to provide sufficiently, the government’s borrowing would squeeze the supply of available credit in the private economy, interest rates would be driven up sharply, some private borrowers would be priced out of the game and economic activity would suffer.

This relationship between money creation and government debt was the reason why, during World War II, the Federal Reserve had reluctantly accepted a totally passive role in supporting the government’s enormous borrowings. The central bank had provided whatever money supply was needed to insure that the Treasury could sell its huge offerings of war debt, and interest rates were never allowed to rise above 2 percent. The famous Treasury-Fed Accord of 1951 freed the central bank from its subordinate status, but the Fed still had a fundamental obligation to make sure the federal government could market its debt.

In the extreme, if the Fed was inclined to be too accommodative in this process, the result was what Ronald Reagan and other critics liked to call “printing press money.” To economists, the effect was called “monetizing” the debt—a circular game in which the central bank bailed out the Treasury by inflating the currency. The circle went like this: The executive branch borrowed money from the private sector by selling new Treasury notes and bonds. The Fed then diluted the value of this debt by buying up old Treasury notes and bonds from the private sector and paying for them with newly created money. The Federal Reserve, in effect, wound up holding more and more of the government’s debt paper in its own cloistered portfolio—and the private economy wound up with a bloated money supply.

Except in wartime, no American government would overtly pursue such a policy and certainly no one at the central bank ever willingly accepted it. Yet, over time, deficit-driven inflations had occurred in approximately that way. This was not because the Fed consciously decided to “monetize” the debt but because the process was much more gradual and ambiguous than the critics of “printing press money” presumed. How much accommodation was too much? There was no easy measure indicating when the effects of “monetizing” began.

The Federal Reserve was expected to support the orderly sale of new Treasury debt issues. It was also not supposed to thwart economic growth. Both obligations encouraged an inclination toward maintaining relaxed credit conditions and stable interest rates. Yielding a step at a time, misjudging the economy or retreating before political pressure, the central bank’s inflationary errors of the past had usually been a gradual accumulation of small, unacknowledged surrenders.

This time, however, the Federal Reserve was determined to stand its ground. Paul Volcker had said as much, albeit less bluntly, in his frequent appearances on Capitol Hill, when he repeatedly warned Congress to take corrective action on the deficits. The Fed, he said, was resolved not to yield to the accumulating pressures of the growing debt—Congress and the President should not count on inflation to bail them out of their fiscal deficits. The Federal Reserve did not intend to “chicken out.”

Instead, Volcker and the Federal Reserve chose an unprecedented alternative strategy—keeping interest rates at a very high level in the midst of economic recovery. In order to hold its ground, the Fed would “lean against the wind” as it had never done before. Nominal rates had declined, but were still far above normal, as the recovery began. Meanwhile, the real cost of money—because of reduced inflation— was going up at a time when it should have been going down.

The Fed’s strategy would satisfy its obligation to assist the executive branch in marketing its burgeoning debt paper. If interest rates were high enough, the Treasury would have no difficulty selling its new bonds. The higher returns available in U.S. financial markets would attract capital from around the world for all sorts of financial investments. The federal government’s expanding debt, required by the Reagan Administration’s huge deficits, would, in effect, be borrowed from foreigners. The Fed would fulfill its obligation, but real interest rates, instead of subsiding to normal levels, would remain stuck at modern peaks.

As Vice Chairman Preston Martin explained:

We have to have rates high enough to bring in the capital. All of us have to consider the government financing very seriously. You can overemphasize the importance of the rates in bringing in capital because it’s also attracted by the opportunities and the U.S. as a safe haven. But keeping the rates high enough to attract foreign investors is the argument that’s made and it’s an awareness we all had.

Governor Partee agreed: “We let conditions exist that made the U.S. interest rates look favorable compared to foreign investments. We stayed above the foreign interest rates so the foreign investors would be attracted to the U.S.”

When Preston Martin was anxious to get lower interest rates, he first had to satisfy himself that the Treasury would still be able to market its debt. “I made frequent contact with participants in the financial markets on this question,” the vice chairman said. “How are the Japanese reacting to these new thirty-year securities? Not the French or the British. What mattered was the Japanese. Are the Japanese buying? Fine, if they are, we don’t have to raise rates.”

Real interest rates, guided by the Federal Reserve’s money-supply policy, became the steering mechanism for its control over the nation’s economic expansion. Given the bizarre conflict between monetary and fiscal policy, the extraordinary real rates would attract ample capital to finance the debt. At the same time, the high real rates would enable the Fed to hold back the real economy—forcing it to accept a slower pace of expansion.

None of this was announced as government policy, much less explained fully to average citizens, and the ensuing years were marked by a deep confusion over how the Fed was actually managing money. The public (and many political leaders) kept celebrating the lower nominal interest rates, grateful to the Fed because nominal rates were declining steadily from their recessionary peaks in 1981 and 1982. Yet the actual consequences for the economy were the opposite. Real interest rates, the true measure of money’s cost, were not falling at all. Real rates would be kept at historic highs—and even pushed higher.

The arithmetic was not complicated. Price inflation, after all, had fallen drastically since 1981, by about two-thirds. Nominal interest rates had also declined since mid-1982—but only by about one-third. The difference meant that the real return for lenders was increasing dramatically. In other times, the nominal interest rates would have been allowed to fall much lower, but not in 1983. As the Fed regulated the overall supply of credit, it kept the nominal interest rates from subsiding in proportion to the decline in prices. This was the second core reason why finance was now flourishing. Dollars were “hardening” and worth more—but finance was also collecting more dollars on every transaction.

The bondholders, the owners of capital, now actually enjoyed the best real return on their wealth in at least fifty years and probably since the beginning of the twentieth century. Real interest rates went higher in 1983 than the extraordinary levels they had reached in 19811982 when the Fed was actively trying to depress the economy. Traditional expectations about the reasonable return on capital were shattered.

The real rate of interest on twenty-year Treasury bonds, for instance, had averaged only .6 percent back in the inflationary months of 1979. It rose sharply to an average of 5.4 percent during the five quarters of the recession. Early in 1983, the real rate on this long-term U.S. debt rose to 6.6 percent and, later in the year, it would go still higher—to 8.4 percent. By comparison, the traditional rule of thumb in financial markets assumed that government long bonds historically yielded a real return of no more than 2 percent, usually less.27

The higher real returns, of course, affected every form of financial instrument, not just government securities. For long-term, high-grade corporate bonds, for instance, the real interest rate averaged 8.2 percent in 1983-1984. According to Henry Kaufman of Salomon Brothers, these corporate bonds had averaged a real return of about 1 percent for all of the previous postwar years. Short-term credit was, likewise, more expensive in real terms. The banks’ prime lending rate, traditionally pegged at 3 or 4 percent above the rate of inflation, was now kept at a much more profitable spread—more than 7 percent above inflation.28

On one level, Volcker’s strategy worked. Plenty of lenders, worldwide, were eager to put their money in the United States and collect the record yields. The Treasury issued larger and larger volumes of new debt paper and found plenty of willing lenders. But pegging the real cost of credit at such extraordinary levels also posed a fundamental risk. Could the economy stand it? Could the fledgling recovery take hold and flourish when businesses and consumers were compelled to borrow at such unfavorable terms?

Even some officials inside the Federal Reserve had their doubts.

On March 7, 1983, the Federal Reserve Board was again asked to cut the Discount rate, but this time the request did not come from politicians at the White House. It came from within the Federal Reserve System itself. Like an anxious chorus, the boards of directors at five Federal Reserve Banks—Minneapolis, Chicago, Kansas City, San Francisco and Boston—petitioned the Board of Governors to authorize another reduction in the Discount rate. The governors declined to do so. The Discount rate remained stuck at 8.5 percent. Short-term interest rates were not allowed to decline further.

Two weeks later, the Boston Fed was back again with the same request. The Board of Governors turned it down. In early April, Boston tried again and was again rejected. Three more times, the directors at the Boston Fed petitioned the board in Washington to reduce interest rates further and, each time, they were turned down.

When Boston finally gave up, the Chicago Fed picked up the cause and continued the plea for lower rates. Seven times the Chicago bank asked Washington to lower the Discount rate and seven times Chicago was turned down. The San Francisco Fed and the Philadelphia Fed chimed in too. Even the New York Fed, always closer to the home office than the other regional banks, petitioned for lower rates and was rebuffed. In all, during 1983, different Federal Reserve Banks forwarded twenty-one requests to Washington asking for an additional reduction of the basic borrowing rate. The Board of Governors rejected all of them. The Discount rate remained right where it had been since December 1982.

The frustrated directors of the regional banks eventually yielded to the seven governors in Washington because they had no choice. Among other things, the episode demonstrated the real power relationships within the Federal Reserve System. The twelve Reserve Banks could propose, but the Board of Governors could ignore. The running argument between the central office and the regions, virtually unreported in the press at the time, was especially notable because, for once at least, the conservative officials from the Federal Reserve Banks were advocating a more liberal monetary policy than the Board of Governors was willing to adopt.

Region by region, the Reserve Bank directors were worried that the high level of interest rates was going to smother the economic recovery. Rates ought to be lower at this stage—anyone could look at the rising real cost of credit and see that. Holding the line was Paul Volcker. He knew rates were abnormally high. That was what he intended.

“The economy was still at a very depressed level, even though the recovery had begun,” Frank Morris, president of the Boston Fed, explained. “We needed a climate conducive to a high level of capital formation, and to do that, we needed to get the cost of capital down. We were afraid the effect of the very high cost of capital would be to wash out the gains of the Keynesian stimulus from the tax cuts.”

New England was primarily a high-tech producer of capital goods— computers, electronics, process-control instruments, machine tools. Morris and the businessmen on his board of directors feared these sectors would be stymied by the high rates, unable to raise capital for their own expansion or to find buyers who could afford to invest in new equipment at these rates.

“When 'the evidence started coming in in the spring that, in fact, the economy was pulling out of the recession at a very fast clip, we ended our recommendations for rate decreases,” Morris said. “When we stopped, the Midwest banks picked it up because their part of the economy still looked pretty grim. Our computer industry looked good, but in their heavy industry nothing was going on.”

The Federal Reserve Board, by rejecting all the pleas for lower interest rates, was effectively defining its new strategy—a defensive posture designed to counter the economic stimulus generated by the fiscal deficits from Congress and the President. High real rates would attract investors for the Treasury’s debt financing, but a second purpose would simultaneously be served—high interest rates would hold back the real economy.

That was the logic the Federal Reserve intended to pursue for this recovery: it intended to restrain growth and keep the American economy from reaching its full capacity and full employment. Given the economic stimulus already in place from the tax cuts and the Fed’s own easier money policy, Volcker and other governors assumed the recovery would be vigorous. But this expansion, unlike earlier cycles in the past, must be braked somewhere short of its full potential.

Preventing full employment was the most direct way to prevent a return of inflation. Typically, it was when the economy approached its productive capacity, when goods and labor became scarce, that the natural competition bid up prices and wages. Employers understood the dynamics of a tight labor market; so did labor unions. The surest way to avoid that point—the risk of inflation driven by an “overheated” economy—was simply to keep the economy from ever reaching full speed.

Like Volcker’s earlier initiative against inflation, when the Fed forced the economy into recession, the implications were never explained to the general public, particularly the Fed’s desire to prevent full employment. Stephen H. Axilrod, the staff director of the Fed’s monetary policy, explained the choice in straightforward terms:

If you have a lot of demand, you’ve got to keep interest rates high to keep the demand from overheating the economy. When you’re trying to wring out inflation, you have to keep the economy below its potential. The nasty way of putting that is you have to keep unemployment high. If you start from a low enough level, you can still have an economy growing rapidly at high rates of real interest. But you won’t have an economy of full employment. You can only risk getting interest rates down to historically acceptable levels when you are convinced the risk of inflation is gone. That’s a judgmental point.29

For obvious reasons, the Federal Reserve would never state this trade-off explicitly, for it meant that the federal government was actively pursuing an economic policy designed to keep people out of work and to thwart that hallowed goal of American politics—full employment. It also contradicted what the President was telling the public about boundless prosperity.

Occasionally, the minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee meetings hinted obliquely at these intentions. Various anonymous members of the FOMC worried about the possible resumption of “excessive wage settlements.” Others expressed satisfaction that “workers’ wage demands have been reduced significantly by back-to-back recessions in the past few years and concomitant high unemployment.” Rising wages were usually the largest cost component driving price inflation. If wages could be held down by surplus labor, then inflation could be held at bay indefinitely.

But when would the Fed relent and give free rein to the economy? At what point would the central bank decide that the risk of inflation was gone and interest rates could be allowed to fall to normal levels? In large measure, the Federal Reserve would leave that judgment to the financial markets. In his management of economic growth, Volcker accepted the financial markets’ expectations of future inflation as the guiding bench mark. If long-term interest rates stayed high in capital markets, that meant investors were still fearful that inflation was going to return. The Fed could have challenged the investors by easing credit conditions and pulling down short-term rates, but it did not. Volcker was convinced the central bank would lose its own restored stature if it went against the markets and permitted too much economic growth.

From time to time, Volcker did attempt to “jawbone” Wall Street sentiments by expressing his own optimism. “If the inflation outlook is as good as I think it is, long-term interest rates are far too high,” a “senior Federal Reserve Board official” told The Wall Street Journal in April. The “senior official” was identified in the press a day later as Volcker. His veiled efforts did not succeed. Long-term rates remained stubbornly high and the Fed acceded to the anxieties of the bondholders.30

In the interest of preserving stable money, the Federal Reserve intended to stand astride the American economy and discreetly frustrate the normal popular ambitions for prosperity—Ronald Reagan’s goal and the public’s too. Volcker was reasonably explicit about his intentions for the economy. Usually, after a deep recession, the economy bounced back with a booming expansion—like a coiled spring that has been pushed down. This time, Volcker said, his hope was to limit real GNP growth to 3.5 to 4.5 percent in 1983—far short of the 7 to 8 percent growth that would normally be expected in the first year of a recovery. This was not, of course, what the White House political managers had in mind.

A slower expansion, Volcker reasoned, would permit a more durable one—slower but longer-lasting. And Volcker decided to stake out his line of defense early rather than later, before things could get out of hand.

By May, the recovery was barely six months old, and unemployment, though declining steadily, was still above 10 percent. The Federal Reserve chairman decided, nonetheless, that it was not too soon to slow things down.

“It was time to get a little order in the barroom,” Volcker said, “or at least to avoid any sense of disorder.”

Like a good central banker, Volcker was looking ahead and trying to anticipate. What he saw was a very healthy boom emerging that might swiftly threaten the Fed’s control. “You had this great big tax cut accelerating the economy,” he said. “You had reviving industry and the money supply had been running pretty darned high. I had no doubt we ought to be tightening up.”

Volcker and other Fed veterans from the 1970s were haunted by a perplexing question: When exactly did the Federal Reserve make its big mistakes in the past? At what point in the previous business cycles had the central bank been too accommodative and permitted price inflation to take off? The short answer was that no one knew for certain, but Volcker and others had a strong hunch. They believed that the Fed had lost control early in the previous cycles, when money was easy and everyone was pulling for a strong recovery.

“I think we tended to make mistakes in the past—not at the end of an expansion or the end of boom, not so much in a recession—but by too much stimulus during the early part of an expansion period when things tend to get out of control before you realize it,” Volcker said. “I hope we don’t make that mistake again.”

Lyle Gramley and Charles Partee agreed. As senior staff officials, both men had been seared by the embarrassing episodes of the past— the late 1960s, 1972-1973 and 1977-1978—when the Fed had waited too long to restrain and price inflation had escalated. In each instance, the Federal Reserve was accused of ineptitude or political collusion. Each time, the policy makers were compelled to “slam on the brakes” and force a painful recession in order to stop the inflation.

“During the earlier phase of economic recoveries,” Lyle Gramley advised a business audience, “growth in supplies of money and credit has often begun to accelerate because the Federal Reserve did not let credit markets tighten sufficiently while unemployment and excess capacity were still relatively high. That is the mistake we must be particularly careful to avoid. . . .”31

“There’s a very natural tendency,” Partee said, “to want to see good times better than what they are. Some sectors will be lagging behind the overall recovery and utilization will still be below capacity. Business profits may still be low and unemployment may still be higher than it was. So there is a tendency to keep interest rates from pinching as much as they might—then waking up and discovering that you’ve had too much money growth and you’re back in inflation.”

When the Federal Open Market Committee met on May 24, Lyle Gramley stated the case for tightening now. Fiscal policy was very stimulative. The Fed had allowed enormous growth in the money supply already, and as the economic activity picked up, money velocity seemed to be resuming a more normal pattern—people were spending money faster and, thus, multiplying the real economic effect of the swollen money supply.

“We need to throttle back the aggregates,” Gramley declared. “The economy doesn’t need more stimulus. If we’re not willing to throttle back now, when will we be?” The chairman made similar arguments. It was time to apply a little braking action.

But many others on the FOMC couldn’t see it. The recovery was “still only a baby,” Frank Morris of Boston said, and some regions of the country were still in virtual recession. Even Henry Wallich, usually the hawk, doubted the timing. Anthony Solomon of the New York Fed, usually Volcker’s ally on monetary issues, led the charge against the chairman.

“I thought we ought to wait,” Solomon said, “because of the LDC debt problems and the overvalued exchange rate. The damage the dollar was doing to the country was already obvious. I didn’t feel the strengthening of the economy was so much that it required a tightening.”

If the Fed raised interest rates now, even modestly, that would put new pressure on the struggling Latin-American nations that were trying to keep up with their debt payments to the banks. Solomon also worried about adding damage to the trade-sensitive sectors of the American economy by pushing the dollar higher in international exchange. As the higher U.S. interest rates attracted global capital to dollar-denominated financial assets, the increased global demand for dollars raised its exchange value against other currencies. And, as the dollar continued its rise in value, the price disadvantage deepened for American industries, from machine tools to agriculture, against foreign competitors. If the Fed pushed domestic interest rates a notch higher now, the damage to manufacturing and farming would be compounded.

“My inclinations were to vote with the Solomon contingent because I was concerned about LDC debt,” Vice Chairman Preston Martin said. “This was one of the few occasions when I didn’t vote my inclinations. My sympathy was with the Solomon faction, but I didn’t want to see the chairman defeated. I didn’t think we could afford that right at that point, with the LDC debt still so fragile. As the voting came around to me, I felt the chairman might well lose. I sort of bit my lip and voted with him.”

Volcker was proposing only a modest tightening, but as the roll call unfolded, the chairman discovered he had misjudged the opposition in the committee. The FOMC was split right down the middle and Volcker did not have a majority. “An impasse,” he called it.

“Even Volcker, who’s very shrewd, sometimes miscalculates what’s going on in the committee,” Solomon said. “If he had realized that I really meant that this is how I was going to vote and that others would follow me, I don’t think he would have pushed it to the same degree.” There was a moment of tension and embarrassment all around the boardroom table. It was obvious the vote was going to be 6 to 6 and the chairman’s resolution was going to lose. Then Henry Wallich, though he agreed with Solomon, switched sides and voted with Volcker. That made the final vote 7 to 5.

Afterward, other members needled Wallich about his sudden change of thinking, but he defended his vote. “I think it would have been bad for the chairman and bad for the institution,” Wallich explained. “It would have been just bad, period.”

The FOMC’s tightening in May, modest as it was, produced visible results in the money market. The Federal Funds rate crept upward by 100 basis points over the next eight weeks. Mortgage rates rose about 125 basis points and, in a matter of weeks, the housing industry felt the difference. Sales of new homes and housing construction stopped expanding. With a gentle nudge on interest rates, the Fed was trying to take the edge off the boom.

“The response in real activity was remarkably swift,” Frank Morris told a conference of economists. “The new structure of the mortgage market gives the Federal Reserve a powerful tool for moderating the pace of the economic advance. We are likely to see more such ‘midcourse corrections’ in the future.”32

In any case, Morris, Solomon and the other dissenters were quickly compelled to concede that Volcker had been right. As more data came in, it was clear the recovery was not moderate, as Volcker had hoped. It was roaring. The real economic growth in the spring quarter exceeded 9 percent. A classic post-recession boom was developing— despite the high level of interest rates or Volcker’s modest effort to apply restraint.

Money policy worked with time lags that were hard to predict. For many months before, the Fed had been generously supplying new liquidity to the financial system, pumping in money at unprecedented rates in order to get the economy restarted. Now all that money was at work in the real economy and ample enough to permit a rapid expansion. Neither business borrowers nor families seemed deterred in the least by the high real cost of credit. The Fed’s initial attempt to brake gently was barely noticed in the general flourishing of good times.





