16 WINNERS AND LOSERS


The headline in the Washington Times on April 18 stirred considerable interest because the conservative newspaper was well connected at the Reagan White House. The President, the newspaper declared, has decided not to reappoint Paul Volcker as Federal Reserve chairman. White House aides promptly denied it, but the story was accurate. Treasury Secretary Donald Regan had persuaded the President to decide, first of all, that Volcker would not be given another four-year term as Fed chairman. Later, they could settle on the successor.1

“The President did decide not to reappoint Volcker,” an Administration official explained, “but it didn’t mean anything.” As often happened in Washington, the newspaper leak was only the beginning of the argument, not the end. For the next two months, as the White House advisers cast about for a likely alternative, the powerful economic interests and other politicians all expressed their preferences. In the end, they chose Volcker.

Jim Baker was very reluctant to reappoint Volcker [David Stockman said]. Baker felt Volcker had prolonged the recession much longer than necessary. Volcker didn’t communicate with him very well. Baker would say: “How can you keep this misery going for five quarters?” Don Regan was adamant about Volcker. He said in private meetings many times: “There’s no way we’re going to put that guy back in there. He won’t take orders.”

The problem, however, was agreeing on the successor. Edwin Meese favored Preston Martin, the Fed vice chairman and a like-minded California businessman. Donald Regan liked Walter Wriston of Citibank and also Paul W. McCracken, CEA chairman under Nixon. Alan Greenspan, an outside economics adviser to President Reagan and also a former CEA chairman, was recommended as a candidate whom Wall Street would accept. Beryl Sprinkel was mentioned as a possibility and even Milton Friedman.

The Federal Reserve chairman remained publicly aloof, but privately he expressed his desire for another term. “Volcker knew who his friends were and we talked about it,” Stockman said. “He said to me. ‘Now is not the time for discontinuity. I am now in the middle of the debt problems and these delicate negotiations. I’ve got all these deals going and they are based on trust and informal understandings.’” Stockman and Martin Feldstein, the new CEA chairman, lobbied strenuously in Volcker’s behalf.

“I pecked at Baker like a hen,” Stockman said. “I told him the Fed was doing a pretty credible job and Volcker’s the only thing Ronald Reagan has going for him. He’s got credibility. The markets trust him. We need to keep him.”

Baker and the President’s other advisers heard the same message from many quarters. Senator Jake Garn, chairman of Senate Banking, urged the White House to reappoint Volcker. “I wonder, if he is not reappointed, what kind of signals do you send to the marketplace?” Garn said.2 Howard Baker, the Senate Republican leader, delivered his own endorsement. So did Senator Robert Dole, the Finance chairman.

The U.S. Chamber of Commerce was for reappointment as were the National Association of Manufacturers, the Business Council and The Wall Street Journal. The major interests overshadowed the dissenters. The National Association of Home Builders, remembering the devastation of Volcker’s recession, urged the President to appoint a more moderate leader for the central bank—Preston Martin, a former developer himself, who would be more sympathetic to the pressures on housing and small business. The home builders organized a coalition of twenty-four small-business organizations in support of Martin’s candidacy.

The heavy thunder, however, came from Wall Street—scores of daily calls and letters from bankers and brokers to their contacts in the Reagan Administration, all urging Volcker. The more the financial markets read in the newspapers that the White House men wanted to pick someone else, the more intense the lobbying became. James Baker received a personal plea from an old friend in Houston, Ben Love of the Texas Commerce Bank, and lots of calls from Wall Street leaders. “Wall Street was bugging us all the time,” an aide to Baker said. “They really waged a campaign, just tons of them calling.”

Lest there was still any doubt about what Wall Street wanted, a survey of 702 financial-market executives was released by the A. G. Becker Paribas brokerage—77 percent of them wanted Volcker. If he was not to be reappointed, Alan Greenspan was their distant second choice, but only 37 percent expressed special confidence in him. Milton Friedman was third with 11 percent. Preston Martin was sixth with only 7 percent.3

The White House advisers resented all the heat from Wall Street and insisted that it counted for little. This President was a “Main Street” Republican, they claimed, who paid little heed to the powerful voices of finance. Nevertheless, the small-business men from “Main Street” who wanted someone else did not get their way. The bankers and brokers from Wall Street did.

“No one had a strong alternative,” said David Stockman, who had helped encourage the Wall Street lobbying. “There was a rising crescendo that failure to appoint Volcker would upset the markets. In the end, that was decisive.”

“Volcker won by default,” an Administration official complained. “It was almost unanimous that it should be somebody other than Volcker, someone we can work with better and with the preferred ideology. But all the parties against Volcker were totally split. You couldn’t get three votes for any one person.”

The discussions boiled down to a choice between Volcker and Greenspan—then Greenspan withdrew and endorsed Volcker. The President’s counselors were confronted with a choice that, for many months, they had promised themselves they would not make.

At that point, the Federal Reserve chairman himself forced the issue. On June 6, Volcker abruptly phoned the White House and arranged for a private meeting with the President. None of the White House senior advisers was included. Volcker and Reagan were alone together in the Oval Office.

“This has dragged on too long and you ought to settle it one way or the other,” Volcker told the President. The rumors and speculations were adding to financial uncertainties. The President should make his choice and announce it.

The Fed chairman raised another tantalizing point: if reappointed, he would not necessarily serve out the full four years. Volcker reminded the President that he supported the idea of making the Federal Reserve chairman’s tenure roughly coterminous with the President’s term, so that a new President could appoint his own Fed chairman within one year after taking office. Legislation to make this change was pending in Congress and Volcker had already endorsed it. A reasonable inference, the kind that politicians might draw from such conversations, was that Volcker was hinting at a compromise—if Reagan reappointed him now, Volcker could step down in midterm and the President, assuming he was re-elected, would be able to choose his own man in 1985 or early 1986.

When Volcker got back to the Fed, Edwin Meese and James Baker came running over to his office. “What did you tell the President?” they asked. Volcker told them the same things he had told their boss. Later, when the substance of these conversations dribbled out into political gossip, it was said that Volcker had promised the White House that he would resign by 1986 and they could appoint their own Fed chairman. This was not the case, but every time this rumor surfaced, financial markets expressed their jitters and the principals denied there was ever such an agreement.

The White House political managers, yielding reluctantly to the inevitability of Volcker’s reappointment, nevertheless attempted to establish some ground rules with him for the future course of monetary policy, particularly leading up to the crucial re-election season in 1984. “You don’t want a political whore as Fed chairman,” one of them explained, “but you don’t want someone who is philosophically opposed to your economic policy or partisan in the other direction. We assured ourselves that we could count on him being neutral as a policy maker.”

The conversations were never so explicit that they took the form of negotiations. Volcker, for his part, vigorously denied that he had ever discussed the conduct of monetary policy in connection with his reappointment, either with the President or with any of the senior White House advisers. Still, the President’s men thought they had an understanding with the Federal Reserve chairman.

I certainly recall a meeting [an Administration official said] where the President would say to Volcker, “I’d like to know that we can count on you.” Or rather he’d say, “I’d like to know that your goals and mine are the same—sustained economic growth without inflation.” And Volcker agreed with that. We translated that into this understanding: the Fed would provide sufficient growth in the money supply to insure sustained economic growth, without inflation.

Besides the President, the discussion with Volcker included Baker, Donald Regan, Edwin Meese and Michael Deaver, the official said. “There was no suggestion that I’m not going to reappoint you if you don’t agree to this, but we may well have discussed that the brakes were shoved on too hard in the recession,” the official recalled. “And we made the point that there were no signs of inflation returning now.” The supposed “understanding” meant a lot more to the White House than it did to Paul Volcker. The President’s advisers thought they had extracted operating terms from Volcker, an agreement they could hold him to later, if the Fed shifted course and threatened the recovery in the 1984 campaign season. But what exactly did “sufficient” mean? Or “sustained economic growth”?

“It’s a perfectly good cliche,” a senior White House official complained, “but it’s meaningless. It’s not a coherent basis for asking the Fed to pursue a specific policy. Volcker can deliver on that commitment with 3 percent money growth and others can say it should be 6 percent. All the parties thought it had meaning, but Volcker could make it mean anything he wanted.”

The White House, nevertheless, expected the terms to be honored. As David Stockman said, “Jim Baker thought he had a commitment that nobody was going to screw up the economy in the election year.” On June 18, the President chose his weekly Saturday-morning radio broadcast to announce the news: he was reappointing Paul Volcker to a new four-year term. Volcker, the President declared, is “as dedicated as I am to continuing the fight against inflation.” Afterward, Treasury Secretary Regan added an important corollary: “Like the President, Volcker wants the recovery to be sustained and is committed to lower interest rates.”4

The Treasury Secretary, addressing the National Press Club, was perhaps entitled to a moment of I-told-you-so. For more than two years, the former chief executive of Merrill Lynch had been heckled by the press for his optimism, belittled for his stubborn faith in the principles of supply-side economics. Now it was his turn to cite the economic statistics. The bullish American recovery was redeeming the faith.

As custodians of the American Dream [Donald Regan boasted], we have nursed it through difficult days. We have brought it into the sunlight. And we will not surrender it to those who would go back to the old, failed dogmas of yesterday. We will now move from recovery to renewal. And we will disperse the dream until it is shared equally by millions who until now have known it only as an abstraction.

Industrial production had soared by 19 percent in the last three months. New orders for durable goods were up 36 percent. Employment in manufacturing jumped by 100,000 for two months running.

Retail sales increased at a 27 percent rate over the last quarter. Autos were up 38 percent from the low point the year before, iron and steel up 44 percent, housing up nearly 50 percent. Consumer confidence, measured by regular polling at the University of Michigan, was soaring to its highest level in ten years.

Donald Regan declared victory and mocked those liberal skeptics who had opposed the President’s original doctrine, the program of massive tax cuts for business and individuals. The critics, Regan said, resembled comic-strip characters from Pogo, reduced to warning: “We are confronted with insurmountable opportunities.”

The recession did last longer than anyone expected [Regan continued]. But all the while, overlooked or simply denied by those who peddle pessimism for their livelihood, the market forces embodied in the Reagan program were gathering momentum. As inflation fell and worker productivity increased, private companies found themselves with more and more internally generated funds. . . .

But our economic program is really aimed at Main Street. . . . What we are seeing is the creation of new opportunities from the grassroots up. We are building a bridge between today’s recovery and tomorrow’s lasting prosperity. And we are proving that quick fixes, while politically appealing, can never take the place of fundamental market forces and human motivations.5

The liberal critics were certainly wrong about one thing—the recovery was not weak, as they had predicted, but as robust and rapid as any of the previous postwar cycles. As the American economy regained its strength, it was clear that the abnormally high level of interest rates was not going to stunt a normal post-recession boom. Economists could worry about the implications, but the high price of money did not seem to inhibit consumers and businesses from rushing to join the action.

Alfred Zeller, who ran a fur shop in St. Johnsbury, Vermont, noticed that, on the contrary, his business improved when interest rates went up. “A lot of my customers are middle-aged, semiretired and retired,” Zeller said. “Some are widows whose husbands have left them quite comfortable. All they’ve got is liquid assets.” With higher returns on their money funds, they bought more expensive furs.6

William Hamilton, a political consultant for Senator John Glenn, who was seeking the Democratic presidential nomination, found that high interest rates simply did not “personally eat away” at voters. The issue, he concluded, could not be easily packaged by Democrats for the 1984 campaigns.

President Reagan reminded voters repeatedly—and correctly—that nominal interest rates had been cut in half since he took office, from the inflationary frenzy of January 1981 when the prime rate hit 20.5 percent to the current level of 11 percent. What the President did not discuss, of course, was that real interest rates—the exchange of real wealth after discounting for inflation—were actually much higher now and still rising. Though far more significant, real interest rates were another element of money the public didn’t understand.7

Paul Volcker also blithely dismissed the impact of high interest rates on the different classes of citizens. The subject was too complicated, he claimed, to sort out winners and losers. “Lots of relatively poor people love high interest rates^it depends on how they borrow and save,” Volcker insisted. “A lot of older people love high interest. I even get mail, not very much but some, when interest rates go down.”

The Federal Reserve Board’s own research on financial wealth had, of course, described the implications in starker terms. The Fed studies demonstrated that 55 percent of American families were net debtors in terms of financial assets and that a mere 10 percent of American families owned 86 percent of all the net financial wealth. Paul Volcker said he was unfamiliar with this research.

Keynesian economists, in any case, could claim vindication on a more fundamental point about the economy and they did. This was not a “supply side” recovery, they pointed out; it was Keynesian “demand side.” In broad outline, they were correct. Notwithstanding the gloating rhetoric from the President and Donald Regan and other Republicans, the expansion that developed in 1983 did not fulfill any of the supply-side premises articulated back in 1981. On the contrary, the recovery followed the standard Keynesian format for demand stimulus—it was led by consumers spending money on goods in the marketplace, not by savers investing in new capital formation.

The Reagan tax cuts stimulated consumer demand by putting more cash in private hands, and this increased stimulus, combined with the Fed’s easing of interest rates, drove the expansion. After several quarters, consumer spending moderated and, as usually occurred, a boom in capital-goods spending developed, producers investing in new productive facilities and equipment.

This was the standard pattern for economic recovery; the sequence and dimensions did not deviate appreciably from past cycles. The effects of the Reagan fiscal policy were not different from what liberal Democrats had done to manipulate economic growth in previous seasons—raising aggregate demand by running federal deficits—only with $200 billion deficits Ronald Reagan’s Keynesian push was much bolder than anything Democrats had dared attempt since World War II.

“The paradox,” said Charles Schultze, Jimmy Carter’s CEA chairman, “is it’s the opposite of supply-side economics.” The central premise of the new conservative doctrine had been that the across-the-board tax cuts would allow citizens to increase their personal savings—and these savings would flow into capital investment in new factories and equipment, expanding the productive capacity of the nation. Thus, broader prosperity would be created by enhancing the “supply side” of the economy. Nearly the opposite occurred: the savings rate declined, instead of increasing, during the Reagan recovery and fell to record lows the longer the expansion continued.8

Rather than savings, it was more accurate to say Reagan’s economic revival was powered by debt—living on borrowed money. It was borrowed and spent by the federal government, by businesses and by consumers. As the recovery proceeded, an increasing portion of the accumulating debt was borrowed from abroad—capital supplied by foreign investors. For the first time since 1914, the United States would become a debtor nation again, borrowing more than it lent in international finance.

Ronald Reagan’s version of Keynes really was different, however, from what Democrats had done before him, despite the broad similarities. The President’s economic policy, combined with the Fed’s, effectively inverted the old liberal priorities—as if the principle of income distribution articulated by Marriner Eccles and the other New Dealers had been stood on its head. Instead of pushing money downward, in order to stimulate the consumption of goods by the broadest base of families, the federal government was now discreetly pushing money upward—concentrating income disproportionately in the upper economic brackets.

The reversed redistribution of incomes was masked at first by the general prosperity, but the effects were already visible in 1983. According to the U.S. Census, only families on the top 20 percent of the economic ladder enjoyed real increases in their after-tax household incomes from 1980 to 1983. The others, the bottom 80 percent, actually lost. The highest fifth, families earning $38,000 or more, gained an average of $1,480 per household in real income, and the top 5 percent, earning more than $60,000, gained an average of $3,320. Families in the middle lost about $560 and the working poor lost about $250.

The progressive ladder that had guided liberal redistribution politics for two generations was turned upside down. The wealthiest got most and the least got less. The income share that went to the most prosperous families, the top fifth on the ladder, became even more disproportionate, increasing from 40.2 to 42 percent of all U.S. income.9

The reversed redistribution flowed from several channels of government action, involving both fiscal policy and the Federal Reserve. The Reagan Administration’s budget cuts had modestly scaled back benefits for lower-income families, while the boom in defense spending naturally tended to favor high-salaried technical professions. The across-the-board reduction in tax rates delivered the largest benefits to taxpayers in the upper brackets. The business tax cuts rewarded the owners of capital and for corporations offset much of the impact of high interest rates. The process of liquidation had depressed economic activity generally, but the largest personal losses were absorbed by labor and small business. AD these influences flowed in the same direction.

Finally, the continuing high level of real interest rates guaranteed a sustained, regressive redistribution of income upward. The rewards and penalties were steadily compounded between creditors and debtors, like compound interest itself. A larger share of incomes automatically flowed to the people who owned most of the net financial wealth, the well-to-do and the wealthy. The borrowers would owe more and more. The rentier had not only eluded the “euthanasia” that John Maynard Keynes had prophesied for him in The General Theory of fifty years before. The owner of capital was now receiving far greater rent for the use of his money than Keynes had ever seen.

In effect, the reward structure of American capitalism was gradually being altered—less for labor, more for capital; a smaller share for work, a larger one for money. This shift was visible in the shrinking portion of total U.S. personal income that was derived from wages and salaries. For many decades, from the 1930s onward, wages and salaries had accounted for about two-thirds of all personal income in the United States. In the 1970s, the wage share declined proportionately as government entitlement programs became a larger portion of incomes, mainly Social Security.

In the era of Volcker and Reagan, the wage share shrank much further—to its lowest level in fifty years—as a larger and larger portion of total U.S. income was claimed by the incomes produced by money, dividends and interest payments. By 1983, wages and salaries accounted for only 60.7 percent of total personal income. The following year, the wage share would shrink further—to 59.5 percent—the lowest level since 1929.

This was the restoration of capital—capital restored to a primacy it had not enjoyed since before the Great Crash. From 1979 to 1983, the personal incomes derived from interest grew by more than 70 percent, an increase of $158 billion, while wage incomes grew by only 33 percent in the same period. When income from stock dividends was included, the returns on capital would claim 20 percent of the whole in 1984, compared to 11 percent in 1979. Money’s share of the rewards generated by the American system and apportioned among its citizens had been virtually doubled—primarily by government action—in only five years’ time.

But did any of this matter? In the general euphoria, the effects of shifting income shares hardly seemed of consequence to the robust performance of the American economy. America was back and expanding vigorously again. The economy was demonstrating that neither high interest rates nor huge deficits would hold it back. After all, wealthy people spent their money too. The increased discretionary income available to the upper brackets from higher interest rates clearly invigorated the consumer demand.

The well-to-do, one could even say, led the nation to recovery. They bought expensive cars and luxury vacations, jewelry and watches and artwork, boats and bikes and pleasure aircraft, second homes at the beach or in the mountains. Home builders who had nearly gone broke a few years before building moderately priced subdivisions discovered a rich new market in resort condominiums. This upward tilt in the composition of consumer spending was fostering what some business economists called “a two-tier economy,” a subtle breakup in the mass-consumption patterns that had driven the American economy since World War II. Fortune magazine summarized the implications for its business readers:

The mass market is splitting apart. Most businessmen don’t realize it yet, but the middle class—the principal market for much of what they make—is gradually being pulled apart. Economic forces are propelling one family after another toward the high or low end of the income spectrum. For many marketers, particularly those positioned to sell to the well-to-do, this presages good times. For others used to selling millions of units of their products to middle-income folks, the prospects are altogether darker.10

Liberal sensibilities were offended, but the liberal impulse for progressive redistribution of income had been discredited and very few were willing to speak for it now. The question of income shares was regarded as a political issue, a faintly old-fashioned argument about social equity, but not a question of great relevance to economic performance.

Even many liberal Keynesian economists accepted that assumption.

So long as aggregate demand was sufficient to drive an expansionary cycle, they allowed, it did not really matter who got the money or what they bought. In gross economic terms, consumer demand generated by wealthy widows buying new furs with their increased interest income was indistinguishable from the consumer demand of a worker spending his pay raise on a new car. All of it would stimulate production and jobs. This was logical only if one assumed no significant difference between furs and cars.

The Democrats of the 1980s occasionally expressed the wish for a fairer distribution of the rewards, but they fashioned it into a political issue labeled “fairness,” not an argument about achieving better economic performance. Most Democrats no longer understood what Mar-riner Eccles had figured out back in the 1930s—that the progressive distribution of incomes was a necessary prerequisite for healthy economic growth. In a sense, Andrew Mellon, the great Republican theorist from the “roaring twenties,” had at last won the argument.

Strangely enough, there was still one group nagged by private doubts about the long-term economic consequences of high interest rates—some of the senior policy makers of the Federal Reserve. Their fitful worrying seemed slightly out of character, since Federal Reserve governors tried to avoid questions of class conflict like the distribution of incomes. Furthermore, they themselves were implicated in the regressive redistribution through their own interest-rate policy, though they insisted this was the unavoidable consequence of the huge federal deficits enacted by Congress and the President. In any case, some at the Fed saw worrisome portents in the lopsided recovery. As Lyle Gramley explained:

With a sufficiently restrictive monetary policy, you might be able to maintain low inflation for a long period of time. In theory, as an economist,

I can imagine that going on for quite a while. Maybe in some theoretical world, you can do that. But—politically—it’s going to be dynamite. The effects on the credit-sensitive sectors of the economy are going to be much too severe.

Charles Partee worried about the effects on incomes. “There’s been quite a lot of redistribution of income toward the higher-income groups,” he said. The high-income creditor classes increase their incomes steadily at the expense of all the borrowers—who must borrow more in order to keep up their spending.

Gramley pointed out a basic disparity in the economic format that the nation was now pursuing: real interest rates were running higher than the real growth rate for the U.S. economy. In fundamental terms, that could not go on forever. A debtor who repeatedly borrows more than the surplus his labor or business enterprise produces will fall further and further behind in his obligations until, sooner or later, the inexorable pressures of compound interest defeat him. This was ancient law in economics, at least as old as Adam Smith, and it had not been repealed. In broad terms, it applied to an entire nation as aptly as it did to individuals.

“If real interest rates exceed growth in the economy—if internal debt is growing faster than GNP—then our problems get worse and worse,” Gramley observed. Henry Wallich made the same point about debt: “Only if growth in indebtedness is matched by growth of income-producing assets can the lender be sure that productive use is being made of his funds and that the debt service can be sustained in the years to come.”11

Wallich’s warning was actually directed at commercial banks when they were lending vast sums to less-developed countries, but the logic applied just as well to American families that borrowed more than their future incomes could pay back or businesses that did the same or, for that matter, the American economy as a whole.

The pathological effects—the steady erosion that occurs when real interest rates are higher than the real growth of output—were perhaps easier to visualize in a small enterprise, a farm or any other business venture whose operation depended on credit. The farmer might borrow operating capital at 6 percent real interest, expecting the enterprise to cover the cost and leave a profit. At the end of the season, however, the real earnings surplus that the farmer has produced with the capital amounts to only 4 percent. He must somehow make up the difference—the missing 2 percent—either from his own personal profits or by cutting production costs further or by borrowing still more money to cover the shortfall.

A small-town banker, John A. O’Leary, Jr., president of the Peoples State Bank in Luray, Kansas, put the dilemma in concrete terms:

The older farmers who bought their land years ago and have it paid off are doing okay. But the young farmer’s in bad shape. We break him as soon as we lend him some money. Say he needs $100,000. Our best rate now is 13.5 percent. The first $12,000 he earns he needs to feed his family.

It costs at least $9,000 to operate three hundred acres. Another one-third of his income goes to the landlord. If he gets six thousand bushels of wheat out of that land, at $3.50 a bushel, he brings in only $21,000. The equation just won’t work. With 6 percent interest rates, he could make it.12

The essential point was that the creditor was guaranteed a 13.5 percent return for the use of his capital—but the capital did not produce a 13.5 percent return. The farmer must swallow the loss. The next season, he would try again, and unless his own output expanded miraculously or the price of wheat went up sharply, he would fall further behind, his burden compounded. The rentier would still collect his interest. Eventually, he would own the farm.

The federal government itself was caught in a similar dilemma, though no one expected the government to fail. Given its $200 billion annual deficits and the high interest rates it was paying on Treasury bonds, the government’s debt burden was expanding much faster than the real economy—the tax base it depended on for revenue. The government’s income-producing asset, the private economy which it taxed, was not keeping up with the government’s borrowing.

Federal outlays for interest payments rose from $52 billion in 1980 to more than $142 billion by 1986—from 10 percent of all federal revenue to 19 percent. This was an important part of the reversed redistribution of income, since the increasing interest payments went from all American taxpayers to the select minority who were bondholders. The rentier s claim on the taxpayer, one could say, had nearly doubled.

Theoretically, of course, Washington could keep up with the debt simply by devoting more and more of the taxpayers’ money to paying the bondholders—and spending less and less on the regular functions of government. Or Washington could raise taxes to close the gap. Neither seemed like a practical option to Congress and the President. Instead, like a debt-burdened young farmer trying to keep going, they decided to do both—to keep spending and to keep borrowing more.

The same debilitating effects worked less obviously on the economy as a whole, when real interest rates exceeded real growth. Many families and businesses, of course, beat the average—their incomes grew faster than their debt burdens and they were able to come out ahead, despite the high cost of credit. Others bumped along and stayed even. Others fell steadily behind. On average, however, the U.S. economy was behind—its output growing more slowly than its debts were growing.

The pressures of this debt squeeze on private borrowers were offset or at least ameliorated in a substantial way by the U.S. tax code. By allowing tax deductions for interest payments, the government effectively reduced the real cost of debt and discreetly subsidized borrowers by forgiving a share of their federal taxes. That softened the effects of the high rates and allowed many businesses and individuals to stay ahead, despite slow growth.

Yet the tax subsidy for borrowers also added a perverse twist: the largest tax savings went to the most prosperous borrowers who paid income taxes at the highest rates. For someone in the 50 percent tax bracket, an interest rate of 13 percent was actually only 6.5 percent after taxes. But, for those in lower tax brackets with less income, the subsidy was much smaller or nonexistent. The interest deduction, originated as a progressive measure to assist debtors and foster easy credit, had a different meaning in an era of permanently high interest rates. In the struggle to cope, the strongest were helped most by the government and many of the weakest were helped not at all.

People did keep borrowing, nonetheless. Credit expanded rapidly as the recovery blossomed, much faster than the Federal Reserve had intended. For a struggling businessman or farmer, the choice sometimes seemed like no choice at all—to stop borrowing was to stop doing business. For families, the spreading optimism and employment, the surging increase in real personal incomes, seemed to promise that they would be able to keep up with their new borrowing. Things were looking up and long-deferred desires were now fulfilled —new cars, new houses, all the good things that the “American dream” promised.

Charles Partee worried about the long-term consequences. The divergence between debtors and creditors bothered him as well as the gross redistribution of incomes that was occurring. The situation reminded the governor of an old, long-forgotten economic theory he had learned in college about the pathology of compound interest.

“I had a little book in college,” Partee mused. “I can’t remember the name of it, but this book argued that the power of compound interest is such a strong and fundamental force in redistributing incomes, you have to break the impact of compound interest rates every so often and write off the debts—if you don’t want to crush people.”

Typically, that write-off occurred in recession or, more spectacularly, in an economic collapse. Debtors failed massively and debts were liquidated, so everyone could start over again. The debts could be extinguished, more subtly, through price inflation—ameliorating the burden of the borrowers by depreciating the value of the dollars they must pay back. Partee was not predicting any of these outcomes, but he was bothered by the portents.

There’s been quite a lot of redistribution of income toward the higher-income groups [the governor observed], and that saps the aggregate demand for the economy. It requires consumers to accumulate more and more debt in order to keep spending. You get a good consumption boom —but you have to borrow to get it. The high-income people invest their increased incomes in financial assets—and that money gets borrowed by everyone else.

Charles Partee was describing essentially the same principles articulated by Marriner Eccles fifty years earlier—the economic importance of equitable income distribution. It was the insight that most liberal Democrats in Congress had forgotten and most Keynesian economists no longer took seriously. Some governors at the Fed saw the pathology developing, but they did not feel it was their place to do anything about it.

“I have no doubt in my mind that the economy would be healthier with lower interest rates,” Gramley said. “It would allocate more savings to real investments, allow the thrifts to improve, help out agriculture, make enormous contributions to the international debt problems. But the way to get lower interest rates is to do something about the budget deficits.”

Robbin Craven, a twenty-eight-year-old unemployed steelworker in Homestead, Pennsylvania, tried a series of part-time low-wage jobs— driving a van for United Cerebral Palsy, security guard at a state hospital, glass-cleaner demonstrator in the local Sears store. Filling out yet another job application, Craven joked about his downward mobility: “What did we used to make in the mill? I can’t remember exactly. I’ll just put down: Big Bucks.”

Carl Redwood, Jr., another young steelworker, had followed the same trail of disappointing jobs after he was laid off—security guard, “meter maid” issuing parking tickets, counselor at a day camp. The vast mills along the Monongahela River outside Pittsburgh had once employed twenty-eight thousand basic steelworkers at premium industrial wages; now there were only six thousand jobs left. Redwood described the big picture:

No matter how you cut it, with all the people looking for jobs, there’s not enough jobs, in terms of good steady jobs. We all have to compete with each other, unemployed people against each other for a shrinking pie. What’s happened in this economy is that higher wages have been busted down, everyone pushed down to a lower wage, even a minimum wage. Yeah, there are people back to work, but what kind of money are they making?

As the economic recovery flourished elsewhere and the mills did not open, anger turned to despair in the Mon Valley and stories of suicide became a staple of local conversations. Everyone seemed to know someone who had tried it or succeeded. The county coroner reported that suicides were up 11 percent “due to economic conditions.”

“At first, I was really mad at the corporation executives,” said Arnie Leibowitz, an ex-worker in the Homestead mill. “At one time, I was thinking I was going to blow them away. I could have done it. After a while, I started blaming myself. The day I was committed, I went out on the bridge to jump. I figured this is it: why go on?” Friends “talked him down” and Leibowitz went to a state mental hospital for treatment.

Others like Robbin Craven held on to their good humor. Craven worked at odd jobs and his wife worked as a nurse’s aide and they paid their bills, though he said his children did not understand why they could not have new clothes or bikes like other kids.

“At first, I was bitter,” he said. “Now I put it all behind me. It’s just past, gone. You could stand on the corner and blame them—yell obscenities down over the hill—but it isn’t going to do any good. They could care less.”13

The steel valley’s continuing distress was an extreme example, but the pressures of surplus labor described by Carl Redwood pushed wages downward across most sectors of heavy industry in 1983 and afterward—long after the national economy had supposedly regained its health. The United Steelworkers accepted wage cuts and freezes in order to keep selected plants open, but more mills closed anyway. Auto workers gave up substantial wage-and-benefit improvements in new contracts at Ford and General Motors in order to protect job security. Coal miners settled for a $1.40-per-hour raise, compared to $3.60 in their previous contract. Airline machinists and other airline unions accepted wage freezes, deferred raises and what union solidarity had traditionally always opposed—a two-tier pay scale for their members. The younger, newer workers would be paid less than older members for the same work. Oil workers, confronted with the closing of eighty-three refineries, settled for a 20-cent raise at Gulf.

Once the recovery was under way, the American economy created new jobs at an extraordinary pace—nearly five million new jobs added in only twelve months’ time, from mid-1983 to the following summer. The unemployment rate moved steadily downward, from nearly 11 percent to an eventual level just above 7 percent. The rising employment generated one of the fastest accelerations in real per capita income ever recorded—up 5.8 percent in the election year of 1984.

But organized labor never really recovered from the recession. The real wages of union workers did not improve once inflation was abated, as Paul Volcker had promised during the painful recession when so many were laid off. Under the pressure of continuing surplus labor and excess capacity in the economy, their real wages declined. In 1983, the first-year raises in the major new labor contracts averaged only 2.5 percent compared to more than 9 percent in 1980 and 1981.

The following year, the percentage was even lower. This was well below the rate of price inflation. They were losing ground.

The bankers on the Federal Advisory Council reported that they were optimistic that inflation would remain subdued—mainly because labor was now subdued. “The fundamental factor explaining continued low inflation is the outlook for unit labor costs,” the bankers told the Fed.

Surplus labor and surplus productive capacity were the principal forces behind labor’s submission, but labor’s weakness was probably also exacerbated by the new tax breaks enacted for business by the Reagan Administration in 1981. The new tax advantages were tilted in favor of capital-intensive buildings and machinery rather than labor-intensive investments. When the boom in capital goods unfolded in late 1983, the spending was devoted largely to purchases of computers and other high-tech equipment that displaced workers—investments that enhanced efficiency but not employment.14

The Republican tax changes were good for certain kinds of construction workers, however. Traditionally, when liberal Democratic regimes undertook “pump priming,” they launched public-works projects, dams and highways and public buildings, as the way to generate jobs. The Republican program, instead, fostered a nationwide boom in commercial office construction through the generous new depreciation rules provided to business real estate. This created abundant jobs for commercial construction workers, but it also left most major cities with a glut of vacant office space—gleaming new office towers whose owners had trouble filling them with tenants. “They are the Republican equivalent of public works,” David Hale of Kemper Financial Services observed.15

Organized labor was, if not broken by the process of disinflation and recovery, dramatically weakened. About 1.1 million union workers were compelled to accept pay cuts or freezes in 1983, more than a third of the workers covered by that year’s new contracts. The “give backs” to management continued at almost the same pace in subsequent years. As unions hunkered down to deal with the new reality, strikes and work stoppages subsided to the lowest level since World War II.

“It takes a damn fool to strike in a slack labor market, with high unemployment, against a company that might have full inventories,” John Zalusky, collective-bargaining specialist at the AFL-CIO, explained.16

The rapid expansion of employment was concentrated in nonunionized service sectors—from the highest-paying jobs in finance and technical professions to low-wage work in data processing and franchised food outlets. In heavy industry, where unions dominated, employment never returned to its pre-recession strength. An estimated

5.1 million workers had been permanently displaced by plant closings between 1979 and 1984, about half in manufacturing, and the Bureau of Labor Statistics estimated that only about 60 percent of them found new jobs.

Union membership declined from 20 million to 17.4 million workers. Organized labor, which at its peak in the 1950s had represented 35 percent of the American work force, now spoke for only 18 percent. The political clout of labor, including its influence in the Democratic Party, declined accordingly.

The Federal Reserve chairman acknowledged that many premier industrial workers were now worse off, but he did not regard this as an injustice. Breaking down wages to a lower level was a return to equilibrium—the classic conservative view of how things were supposed to work.

At the Federal Reserve, officials actually debated among themselves whether 7 percent unemployment—once considered intolerable —could now be reasonably accepted as the optimum, the “natural rate of unemployment.” In other words, if the Fed allowed unemployment to decline much below that level, would it risk setting off another round of wage-price inflation? The question was never formally resolved, but the Fed did not try to push unemployment any lower.

The tacit acceptance of 7 percent unemployment as the norm represented another fundamental shift in the American political agenda. Twenty years before, government economists had considered 4 percent unemployment the national goal, the practical equivalent of full employment, and it was actually achieved in the 1960s. In the 1970s, 6 percent was reluctantly accepted as the best that might be achieved without provoking inflation. In the 1980s, the government’s economic policy makers retreated further. There was not much protest from the public and even the Democratic Party dropped its old rhetoric of full employment.

There’s been very, very little political reaction [Anthony Solomon of the New York Fed observed]. Unemployment is very demoralizing, particularly for young people who can’t find work, but I’d say that 7 percent is probably what you have to tolerate to avoid a pickup of inflation. If you had reasonably full flexibility of wages and prices, you could get it down to 4 percent, but I don’t know what you can do to get more flexibility in wages. You’d have to smash the trade-union movement and there’d still be some downward price stickiness.

In other words, if labor accepted still more wage concessions, its members could go back to work. One by one, the major trade unions grudgingly pursued that bitter formula. Yet the jobs did not return.

Labor would have to yield more. “This is hardball,” a Pittsburgh banker explained. “The steelworkers have given up a lot, but they haven’t given up enough.”

Governor Partee, whose youthful liberal perspective had turned more conservative, was still troubled by the lack of public protest. “Certainly, there are pockets of severe criticism in the steel towns and the Middle West, but there’s no voice for the unemployed,” Governor Partee lamented. “Maybe it’s the majority who feel sort of happy with their lot in life and are unwilling to give up anything for the minority. I don’t know. It’s a worldwide phenomenon. In Britain, it’s 13 percent unemployment. In Germany, it’s 9 percent.”

While Partee supported the Fed’s strategy of restraining the economy from reaching full employment, he did not agree with colleagues who thought 7 percent unemployment was the best that could be achieved. “There’s a trap here,” Partee said. “What you do is just accept any unemployment number that you get and say that that’s what’s necessary to avoid any upward pressure on wages and prices.”

Nevertheless, as a practical matter, that was what the Federal Reserve did. When the unemployment rate remained stuck just above 7 percent, the Fed accepted that outcome. This meant that about 8.4 million people were officially unemployed and another 1.3 million were described as “discouraged” workers who had stopped registering at the unemployment office. Another 5.7 million people—displaced young workers like Carl Redwood and Robbin Craven—were compelled to work part time or at temporary jobs with wages far below their normal incomes. In all, the “voiceless” minority probably totaled more than 15 million citizens.17

Paul Volcker’s views on the matter did not change. The heart of his concern was stable money. Driving down price inflation came before other considerations. “I don’t know what the right or natural rate of unemployment is,” Volcker said, “but I give you one conviction. Over time, you can move unemployment lower if we purge inflation and inflationary expectations than if we don’t.”

Inflation was running below 4 percent, yet mortgage interest rates remained above 12 percent or higher and, still, young families flocked to buy their first homes. The housing industry was averaging close to 2 million starts, not its best year by far, but still vigorous. Governor Lyle Gramley concluded that people had simply adapted to the new environment of high interest rates. 1

house with a mortgage of more than 10 percent was unthinkable, unthinkable. My daughter bought a home in July 1983 and her mortgage was 12.5 percent. Because she had seen mortgage rates 6 percent higher, it didn’t bother her at all. She thought she was getting a good deal.

Is my daughter any worse off? I don’t think so. She bought a smaller house. She pays more of her income for housing. I wouldn’t have done it, but people adjust. She will get along with less of other things in her budget. She drives a smaller car. Now, the consequences for others, who can’t afford housing at all, that’s another matter.

The high price of home mortgages did, in fact, price many people out of the housing market. The National Association of Realtors estimated that 900,000 families were unable to own a home because, no matter how far they stretched, their incomes could not support the monthly payments at such high rates. More and more young people became renters or moved in with their parents.

Those who did buy faced new terms. The new environment for housing was defined by this comparison: in 1970, when the inflation rate was somewhat higher, home mortgages were available at rates between 7 and 8 percent. Now, under similar conditions, mortgage rates were running anywhere from 4 to 7 percent above that level—a huge windfall for the lenders, a huge price increase for the young home buyers.

In the meantime, America’s new houses had also gotten smaller, as builders scaled down the square footage in order to make new models affordable. “This is the first generation that in all probability will never live in a home as large or nice as their parents’ home,” real-estate consultant Lewis Goodkin told The Wall Street Journal.1*

People adapted, but they also became more vulnerable. After years of resistance, most new home buyers now accepted adjustable-rate mortgages that would fluctuate with market rates. This made the initial monthly payments lower, but it also shifted the risk from the lender to the borrower. The creditors for long-term mortgages were now much better protected against the threat of inflation. If prices rose in the future and market interest rates went up, if the Fed tightened credit again, the monthly house payments would go up too and the costs would be absorbed by the homeowners, not the lenders.

The typical young home buyers in the 1980s faced, in addition to the high rates, an entirely different prospect from that of their parents: instead of assuming that their homes would steadily appreciate in value and their real housing costs would steadily shrink, many would encounter the opposite—their home’s value was stagnant or declining and their monthly mortgage payments were rising. In the process of breaking inflation, another fundamental element of American economic life had been effectively eliminated—the discreet process by which homeownership had redistributed wealth from creditors to debtors and accumulated real assets for middle-class families.

Many could not keep up with the new terms. Either their family incomes did not rise sufficiently or they were interrupted by temporary unemployment or the high mortgage payments were simply more than they could afford. Mortgage foreclosures, instead of declining after the recession, the normal pattern, increased steadily through the economic recovery and reached record levels.

Elizabeth Laird and her husband, Ray, lost their new home in suburban Houston as oil prices continued to decline and he was laid off by the electronics firm that served offshore oil rigs. In the spring of 1983, they had bought a $63,000 three-bedroom house with fireplace and two-car garage. The mortgage rate was 15.5 percent and the monthly payments were $1,004, but she took a second job to increase their income. “Houston was in the headlines,” she said. “Everyone came to Houston and found a job. We thought we were on our way up.”

Her husband found another job, then was laid off again. A year later, they were four months behind on the mortgage and they couldn’t find a buyer for their home. The Houston real-estate market had collapsed and prices were falling. Mrs. Laird saw neighbors selling $70,000 homes for less than $60,000. Their subdivision was dotted with “foreclosure” stickers. The Lairds filed for bankruptcy and became renters again.

“I don’t want to be miserable and I don’t want to make my family miserable,” she said. “I want to say, ‘God, I know you’re building character in me.’ But, sometimes, I want to ask, ‘How much character do I need?’”19

The Veterans Administration wound up holding twenty-nine thousand foreclosed homes in 1984, 10 percent more than the year before. The mortgage-insurance industry paid out $425 million on foreclosures in 1985, three times the 1983 losses. The Mortgage Bankers Association of America (where Lyle Gramley would go to work as chief economist after his retirement from the Board of Governors) announced that by mid-1985 mortgage delinquencies reached 6.2 percent of all outstanding mortgages, the highest level in the twenty-two years the association had monitored mortgage payments.20

Mike Stout, a young steelworker from Homestead, Pennsylvania, was one of those who fell behind. He was still employed, but his union had accepted a major wage “give back” to management.

When I bought the house at 16 percent, I figured that would add up to $148,000 in interest over thirty years on a $37,000 house. But I figured I

would at least get the tax deduction, and if interest rates came down, I could refinance it. Even if my wife lost her job, as long as I was working, I’d be able to keep my head above water. Then the “concessions contract” came along. That took $400 a month off my paycheck and I went from bobbing along with my head just above water to sinking.

A year later, the bank foreclosed and Stout moved to an apartment.

I told the bank they were crazy to foreclose because they’d never be able to sell the house and I was right [he said]. I’ll bet there are a hundred and sixty houses for sale in town and nobody’s buying. The house is still sitting there, boarded up. In fact, a bunch of kids broke into it and tore it up. It’s a real mess.21

The fundamental reversal for housing and homeownership, however, was the turning of tables that flowed from the Federal Reserve’s successful campaign against price inflation. Through the 1960s and 1970s, owning a home had been a good investment for rich and poor alike, guaranteed to improve their financial status over time. This was so because, despite rising interest rates and rising prices, the value of housing rose faster. Accumulating equity in the family home was a central assumption of what people loosely called the “American dream” and inflation assisted it.

Starting in 1980, the benefits were reversed, not just for new first-time buyers but for every homeowner, young and old. The value of housing began to decline in real terms—that is, housing prices increased less than the general inflation rate. In 1982, inflation was 3.9 percent and house prices increased only 1.2 percent. By 1984, inflation was 3.7 percent but home prices increased an average of only 3.4 percent. By 1985, the median price of houses would be lower, in real terms, than it had been in 1978. The homeowners’ equity was no longer accumulating, but, in many towns and cities, shrinking. The wealth-accumulating benefits of “owning your own home” were gone.22

The Reagan White House could not have been surprised by this since the CEA chairman, Murray Weidenbaum, had predicted as much in a memorandum to the Cabinet during the recession. “One of the major long-term effects of a lower rate of inflation will be a major redistribution of wealth,” Weidenbaum explained. Many “losers,” he said, would be people who had bet on continuing price inflation— speculators in art and antiques, farmland and commodities—and they deserved no sympathy. But Weidenbaum’s list of “losers” also included the American homeowner.

Most importantly, all homeowners have been “real-estate speculators” and many will experience a loss of wealth [the economist explained].

Those who recently purchased a home at high fixed mortgage rates will experience an unusual loss. Although lower inflation will almost surely increase total real wealth (by increasing productivity), it is important to remember that there is a large vocal constituency (all of the “smart money people” of the 1970s) for higher inflation.23

In real estate, the “smart money people” were gone and no one talked much anymore about inflation. Instead, a new word began to appear in the conversations of buyers and sellers, an economic term that a generation of Americans had never heard—“deflation.”

In midsummer of 1983, the price of wheat was $3.85 a bushel, a few pennies less than the summer before. Naturally, the grain farmers of the Middle West were losing ground. Faced with the higher cost of credit, their own prices were flat or falling. Since the Consumer Price Index continued to rise moderately, the farmers’ real incomes were shrinking.

Crude oil prices were down too—$28.33 a barrel at U.S. refineries, $3 less than in 1982 and still softening. Producers worldwide were offering discounts, trying to keep their shares of customers in a market that had too much supply.24

The American auto industry’s weekly production was up more than 40 percent from the summer of 1982, but GM, Ford and Chrysler were not raising car prices on the rising demand, as they had done so often in the 1970s. Indeed, the Big Three were now competing for auto buyers by offering price bargains—interest-rate discounts on new auto loans.

Grain, oil, autos—these three staples of the American economy reflected the new reality of disinflation and the obvious benefits for American consumers. Gasoline prices moved steadily lower at the filling station. Food prices no longer escalated with maddening regularity at the supermarket. Auto dealers advertised “specials” that really were special.

Yet bizarre things happened to these prices when products crossed international boundaries. The bushel of wheat that sold for $3.85 in Kansas City now effectively cost $5 or $6 when sold in Europe. In Brazil, a barrel of imported crude oil cost Brazilians the equivalent of $50 or $60 in their own currency. The price of French steel sold in the United States had fallen $125 a ton in less than a year. A Toyota, once delivered in San Francisco for $10,000, could now be marketed in America at a real cost to the Japanese of only $7,500.25

The hardy American dollar, created by Paul Volcker’s successful campaign against inflation, was the explanation for every one of these anomalies. The dollar continued to rise in value against the world’s other major currencies—appreciating by more than 50 percent since 1979—and that altered the terms of trade for every international transaction. French steel, Japanese cars, German machine tools, Korean clothes—all sold cheaper in the U.S. market. American-made tractors and computers, American-grown food and fiber, now cost much more when sold to foreign nations.

The effects were devastating for some—another element in the rolling liquidation that persisted long after the national recession hardened. American grain farmers lost more than a third of their share of th global market from 1981 to 1983 as the export price of their wheat and corn practically doubled (and the debt-burdened Latin-American countries cut back their food imports in order to pay their bank loans). Meanwhile, foreign producers of autos, steel, machine tools, computer chips and a long list of other manufactured products grabbed a larger and larger share of the American domestic market—riding the artificial price advantage provided them by the dollar’s rising exchange rate. U.S. imports of manufactured goods rose by 66 percent over four years’ time and U.S. exports declined by 16 percent.

With that kind of competition, Detroit could not very well raise its sticker prices—or the wages of auto workers either. “Even after we’re all done fixing quality and productivity, and fuel efficiency and performance,” Lee Iacocca of Chrysler complained, “the Japanese still have a $2,000 per car advantage in U.S. showrooms. . . . With the yen undervalued against the dollar, by at least 20 percent and probably more, their cars and other products are much cheaper than they would be if the yen reflected its true purchasing power in the open market.”

In 1979, the yen had traded at less than 200 yen to the dollar. By 1983, the ratio was 235 yen to the dollar. The German Deutsche mark was worth 54 cents in foreign exchange in 1979. By 1983 it was only 36 cents. The French franc had been close to four to the dollar. By 1983 it was eight to the dollar. In four years’ time, the tough monetary policy of the Federal Reserve had totally reversed the dynamics of international exchange. The dollar was so strong that it hurt.

“This idea of jobs chasing the weakest currency and the lowest wages is absolutely crazy,” Iacocca declared. That was approximately what was happening: hundreds of thousands, perhaps millions, of U.S. jobs were extinguished, one way or the other, by the strong dollar. The President celebrated the stronger dollar as a sign of America’s restored vigor, but in international trade, the advantage flowed to the weakening currencies of Europe and Asia. By 1983, the estimated loss exceeded 1.5 million American jobs, most of them high-wage, unionized jobs in manufacturing.26

American exporters like Caterpillar Tractor closed down factories at home as they lost sales overseas. Import-sensitive sectors like steel and copper closed mills and mines as cheaper steel from France and cheaper copper from Chile came in and took away domestic contracts. Finally, the major multinational companies, including Iacocca’s Chrysler and the other auto makers, simply exported the jobs. They phased out American plants and moved the production and employment to foreign countries so they too could take advantage of the artificial edge in pricing provided by the lopsided currencies.

One American’s loss, however, was another’s gain. While certain industries and certain workers suffered, every consumer benefited from the dollar-driven price competition. The import-export pressures were a major force in sustaining the low inflation rate that the Fed had established with the recession. It helped explain why the trade unions were still reeling, still giving up concessions even though the economy was expanding smartly again. Labor’s real wages were declining, but, thanks to the dollar exchange, the effective wage differential between U.S. and foreign workers was widening. It also explained why U.S. manufacturers did not dare raise their prices. Only businesses that did not have to compete with foreigners at home or abroad could safely do so.

The new situation, at first, confounded the economic assumptions of both liberal Keynesians and supply-side conservatives. Aggregate demand was increasing rapidly in the U.S. economy, the classic Keynesian formula for expanding output and employment. Yet the formula didn’t work because America’s producers were losing market shares in their own marketplace. The demand was being satisfied, more and more, by output elsewhere. In a fashion, the supply side was being developed, just as the conservative theory had promised, but the new productive capacity was being built up in Taiwan and West Germany and Japan, not the U.S.A.27

“We are decimating our export industries,” Anthony Solomon, president of the New York Fed, lamented. “Volcker and I are extremely concerned about the long-term effects of the strong dollar. But we can’t do anything about it.”

While the hardening dollar helped hold down domestic prices and wages, Solomon could see the longer-term damage to America’s manufacturing base. Once an auto company has moved its transmission factory from New Jersey to Brazil, it would not soon move it back again. Once a machine-tool plant in Cincinnati has been closed and dismantled, it would be very expensive to reopen it. In the mercantilist contests among nations, once market shares were lost in international trade, it took a long time to win them back.

“If fiscal policy were not so lax,” Solomon complained, “we would have more options to take the dollar into account. As it is, we can’t do anything about the dollar, even though it concerns us. I’m being very blunt. Usually, we say that we take a number of things into consideration, including the dollar, but the truth is—our hands are tied.”

The Federal Reserve—knowing the damage it was causing—nevertheless allowed the dollar to escalate steadily in value because to do otherwise might have meant the Fed would lose the “game of chicken” with fiscal policy. To curb the dollar’s appreciation, the Fed could simply moderate its hard-money policy—back off the high interest rates so that foreign currencies would come into balanced value with America’s. That adjustment of monetary policy would have saved U.S. jobs, American market shares, the productive base in industry and agriculture. But the Fed had convinced itself that backing off would mean it was also yielding to the federal budget deficits. In time, this would prove to be a very debatable choice, for it allowed the dollar’s devastation to spread and deepen.

But there was never any real debate on the issue. Inside the Fed, Volcker and Solomon, from time to time, brought up the dollar at FOMC meetings and lamented the destruction. But neither of them proposed to do anything about it. The Federal Open Market Committee was locked into Volcker’s strategy of resistance. Rightly or wrongly, its members told themselves that the strong dollar was a regrettable but unavoidable side effect of the collision between monetary policy and fiscal policy. The side effect, however, was becoming a central force in American economic life—one of the most devastating new conditions imposed by the 1980s.

The central force driving the dollar upward was the Federal Reserve’s determination to keep U.S. interest rates abnormally high— higher than competing interest rates in foreign financial markets. The Federal Reserve held its Discount rate at 8.5 percent while West Germany’s Discount was declining to only 4 percent and Japan’s to 5 percent. Other interest rates offered for both short-term and long-term investments followed the same pattern. U.S. financial assets paid more and capital inevitably sought out the highest return, wherever it was to be found.

As long as the Fed maintained such a wide differential, the financial wealth of the world would naturally migrate toward the United States, where investments in dollar-denominated assets provided the most attractive interest rates. To moderate this flow, the Fed would have to bring down interest rates and pump up the world’s supply of dollars— the very thing it was unwilling to do.

The Federal Reserve can’t solve all the world’s problems [Lyle Gramley insisted]. The manufacturing sector has become much less competitive. What is needed is a depreciation in the value of the dollar. The way to

accomplish that is to reduce the federal budget deficit. I don’t think monetary policy can do anything constructively about that. If we tried to bring the dollar down with a highly expansive monetary policy, that would mean destructive consequences.

The heavyweights of American industry were mobilized for political action. Organized labor was already out front on the trade issue, led by the United Auto Workers, aggressively lobbying Congress for legislation to protect the embattled American worker from unfair foreign competition. But corporate executives preferred a more discreet approach. They called on their friends in the Reagan Administration.

“Everyone of us on the business side has seen our companies affected by the distorted currency relationship,” Lee L. Morgan, CEO of Caterpillar Tractor, wrote to Treasury Secretary Donald Regan and other Cabinet officers. “And each of us is committed to working with you and your government colleagues to develop a solid understanding of the problem and a good dialogue which can ultimately, I hope, lead to a solution.”

When Morgan called at the White House, he was accompanied by some notable corporate names—Borg-Warner, Burroughs, Ford, Cincinnati Milacron, TRW, all members of the Business Roundtable’s export committee. What they wanted, Morgan explained, was for the President to impose an emergency surtax on Japanese imports. That would help offset the 35 to 40 percent price disadvantage American companies now suffered because of the lopsided dollar-yen relationship. Their first meeting with Administration officials was held in October 1982, followed by others. The secretaries of State, Treasury and Commerce and other policy makers listened with apparent sympathy, but the businessmen got nowhere.

The Reagan Administration’s true feelings were summarized in a Treasury-CEA analysis of the Business Roundtable’s complaints against Japan. The paper dismissed the argument that the yen was more undervalued than other foreign currencies. It recommended against any interventions in exchange markets to bring down the dollar. It flatly opposed the idea of an import tax on Japanese products.

The policy recommendations of the paper come out in the right place, OMB economist Lawrence Kudlow reported to his boss. “The protectionist suggestions by various business groups (Ford, Caterpillar Tractor, NAM, Japan-U.S. Business Conference) have been rejected.”28

The corporations next took their grievances to Congress and, allied with labor unions, they lobbied for new trade legislation to curb imports, particularly from the Japanese. A few industrialists like Iacocca and Robert O. Anderson of the Atlantic Richfield oil company also blamed the Federal Reserve for the dollar’s damage. But, given the political sequestration of monetary policy, the central bank was virtually free of blame. The favorite political target, instead, became the Japanese, accused of exploiting American markets while unfairly closing their own to U.S. products.

The exploitation was a two-way street, however. Even Lee Iacocca, though vociferous in his “Japan bashing,” acknowledged that an odd and unhealthy symbiosis existed between the two nations. The hardworking Japanese spent less of their incomes on themselves and saved much more than Americans—a surplus of capital that they then lent back to the United States. In the marketing of U.S. government debt, Japan had eclipsed Saudi Arabia as America’s most important creditor. As Iacocca pointed out:

We’ve been exploiting Japanese initiative and hard work and cheaper wages for a long time. . . . Think about it: The Japanese have been working six days a week, so we can spend our Saturdays riding our Honda motorcycles or our Yamaha snowmobiles through the fields. . . . And we have to factor this in: A big part of the Japanese money made in America stays in America—about 77 percent of it in T-bills and other paper that helps finance our crazy budget deficits. ... So now we’re hooked on Japanese money as well as TV sets.

In the public debate, the Administration characterized the issue as a choice between “free trade” and “protectionism.” It invoked its conservative laissez-faire principles and insisted that governments should not interfere in the free markets that determined the dollar’s international value. The Administration, however, was not just blindly following ideology, as some critics assumed. Internally, the Reagan advisers appreciated the political dividends that might be derived from a strong-dollar policy. The strategy involved an implicit decision that some elements of the American economy—industrial labor and manufacturing, agriculture and other commodities—would have to lose so that other economic interests would win.

Martin Feldstein, a Harvard economist who was chairman of the President’s Council of Economic Advisers from 1982 to the spring of 1984, described the trade-offs most candidly in a memorandum for the Cabinet:

Would it be desirable to have a lower exchange value of the dollar? A weaker dollar would raise exports and reduce the substitution of imports for domestically produced goods. As such, it would be welcomed by those U.S. industries that are now being hurt by the strength of the dollar.

But a weaker dollar and smaller trade deficit would also mean less capital inflow from the rest of the world and therefore a lower level of domestic investment in plant and equipment and in housing. The rise in the dollar is a safety valve that reduces pressure on domestic interest rates; the increase in the trade deficit allows the extra demand generated by the budget deficit to spill overseas instead of crowding out domestic investment.

The question of whether it would be desirable to have a lower-valued dollar is equivalent to asking whether it is better to allow the temporary increase in the budget deficit to reduce domestic investment and interest-sensitive consumer spending or to reduce the production of goods for export and of goods that compete with imports from abroad. The answer to this question is clear in principle: it is better to reduce exports and increase imports.

No one in American political life would have ever acknowledged such a choice in public. It sounded unpatriotic. Besides, the Reagan Administration, having enunciated how supply-side doctrine would restore America’s economic hegemony, could not very well admit that the actual consequences of government policy were to depress U.S. manufacturing and agriculture while encouraging consumers to buy foreign-made products. The Administration’s de facto policy would be good for many sectors—for home-computer sales and housing, for the construction of high-rise office buildings and retailing, for all the thriving service-sector businesses that did not have to compete for sales with foreign rivals. It would be disastrous for farm exports, for heavy industry, for any enterprise whose market was not protected by national boundaries.

The fall in exports and the rise in imports that result from the stronger dollar are clearly causing unemployment and threatening individual firms with possible bankruptcy [the CEA chairman acknowledged]. Perhaps, these adverse effects are more severe than those that would result from an equal decrease in the demand for plant and equipment, housing and other interest-sensitive goods. . . . But at present the burden of proof lies with those who would claim that the industries involved in international trade are more vulnerable. . . .

Feldstein was sanguine about the potential damage, partly because he was confident that the Administration would deliver on its announced intention to reduce the budget deficits. When that occurred, he explained, real interest rates would decline and the pressures driving the dollar upward would dissipate. His confidence was ill-founded. When Martin Feldstein left government and returned to his post at Harvard, the federal deficit was heading to a new peacetime record, $213 billion.

But the CEA chairman offered another, more basic argument in defense of the strong dollar. It preserved low inflation. The import competition suppressed domestic prices and wages, and, Feldstein warned, if the Federal Reserve were to ease its control of money and bring down the dollar, its victory over inflation would be compromised. Licking inflation was one of the President’s proudest accomplishments, a benefit that seemed tangible to every American consumer, and no one in the White House wished to sacrifice it.

“The basic fact is that the value of the dollar can be changed only by modifying the goals for our domestic economy,” Feldstein advised. “A lower value of the dollar requires an expansion of the money supply that increases the rate of inflation.”29

For the short run, it was an astute political strategy for the Reagan Administration to embrace. Despite the long-term economic damage that would be inflicted on America’s industrial base, the immediate benefits promised to please a large swath of the American electorate —an outcome sure to enhance Ronald Reagan’s re-election campaign in 1984. The President, whether he appreciated it or not, was pursuing a program designed to foster immediate gratification for a maximum number of electoral interests—a high-consumption, low-savings policy that would please both individual voters and economic interests. In another time, were Democrats in power, doing the same thing, Republicans would likely have denounced it as a cynical strategy of “buy now, pay later.” Ultimately, the nation would pay an enormous price for the self-indulgence arranged by the government.

But the political strategy, deliberate or otherwise, responded to new realities in the American economy. Manufacturing might still be thought of as the core of America’s economic strength, but it was not the dominant force it had once been, any more than farming. Manufacturing employment represented less than a quarter of the whole. Most Americans did not make things for a living. Most Americans sold intangible services, from school-teaching to computer programming, from trashmen to shopkeepers to lawyers and doctors. In relative terms, they would be winners.

The captains of heavy industry, the traditional locus of power within the Republican Party since the days of Lincoln, counted for less too. When the big corporate names from manufacturing lobbied the Republican White House, their failure to get results demonstrated how much their own political influence had declined. Manufacturers of steel, autos, textiles, machine tools and other basic goods were now outclassed in both economic girth and potential electoral strength. As an auto-company lobbyist explained:

We still think of manufacturing as the “big mule” in politics, but it’s not true. The financial sector, the retailing sector, the service sector, are all so much bigger. The strong dollar was good for them and it was good for consumers. It kept prices down and guaranteed cheap goods, while the tax cuts and deficits meant there was plenty of money to spend. It was anti-manufacturing, anti-labor—but it was pro-consumption, proservices.

What was bad for Chrysler and independent oil drillers and Midwestern farmers was good for Sears, Roebuck and Toyota dealers, Citibank and McDonald’s and many others. An approximate sense of who the winners were was conveyed by a sample list of the domestic service sectors that benefited from cheaper prices on manufactured products and commodities, yet were themselves largely exempt from wage-price competition with foreign rivals. These included health services, banking and finance, insurance, real estate, retailing, hotels and restaurants, travel and transport, legal and technical professions, education, the media and communications.

Like housing construction, these service sectors mainly competed in domestic markets, where they did not have to confront foreign competitors and the price disadvantage generated by the lopsided dollar. As a result, these enterprises could continue to increase profits by raising their own prices (and their employees’ wages too) and most of them did. While wheat and oil and auto prices sagged, the price index for services continued to advance smartly—up by more than 5 percent in 1983. General inflation and its benefits were gone, but not for everyone.

In terms of its own constituencies, the Republican Party had much to gain from the strong-dollar strategy and little at risk. The “white collar” professional-managerial ranks, the core of Republican voters, would enjoy a continuing rise in their incomes under this scheme, from Main Street retailers to Wall Street stockbrokers. “Blue collar” union members would suffer, but they were overwhelmingly Democratic voters anyway. Farmers, the staunchest of Republicans, could be counted on to vote Republican, regardless.

One other important industrial sector was a major winner under the Reagan-Volcker “strong dollar” recovery strategy—the defense industry. The production of armaments was an important special case, a manufacturing sector that did not suffer from the strong dollar because it was shielded from international competition. The U.S. government simply did not buy very many of its weapons from foreigners. The defense companies and their allied support industries, thus, enjoyed two special advantages: the massive budget increases for defense spending expanded their market enormously and, meanwhile, arms manufacturers benefited from cheaper labor, as wages for skilled industrial workers were depressed generally by the slack employment.

Lee Iacocca of Chrysler, futilely campaigning for assistance to other manufacturing industries, tried to argue that “national defense” involved more than simply buying a strong military.

The fact is, without a strong industrial base, we can kiss our national security goodbye [Iacocca warned]. We can also kiss goodbye to the majority of this country’s high value-added jobs. It was the middle class that made this country great in the first place. Take away America’s $8-to-$12-an-hour industrial jobs and you undercut the country. If we don’t watch out, I’m afraid we’re going to find ourselves armed to the teeth—and with nothing left to defend but drive-in banks, video arcades and McDonald’s hamburger stands.

Iacocca’s evocative warnings did not persuade. Most Americans seemed to be doing fine or at least doing a lot better. They were enjoying the restored prosperity and buying things again at stable prices, not much concerned about where the things were made. Certainly, the high officials of the Reagan Administration did not intend to tamper with the recovery, now that it was rolling forward so energetically. Their largest worry, it seemed, was whether the Federal Reserve might decide—independently, for its own reasons—to spoil things.

By late November 1983, kibitzing voices were heard again. The President’s spokesman, Larry Speakes, pointedly observed to the White House press that the Federal Reserve ought not to let the money supply grow too slowly. The Treasury Secretary worried aloud that the Fed might be getting ready to tighten credit again, given the robust expansion of recent quarters.

“I know they have to be restrictive,” Donald Regan said. “My concern is that they not overdo it.”

Milton Friedman went further. The Fed had already overdone it, he said. The growth in M-l had been nearly flat from July to October and, therefore, Friedman predicted, there would be an election-year recession. White House political advisers were not sure they should rely on the monetarist’s analysis, but Friedman’s bold forecast certainly made them more nervous.

In Congress, Representative Jack Kemp and forty-nine other members sent a letter of protest to the President, charging that Paul Volcker was indeed “playing chicken” with the Reagan recovery and, by implication, with the President’s re-election.

“Monetary policy is deliberately being kept unnecessarily tight and the economic expansion held hostage to a tax increase,” Kemp and the other Republicans complained. “Mr. Volcker would offer a quid pro quo of monetary ease and lower interest rates in return for a fiscal policy of higher taxes which is more to his liking.”30

Volcker denied this, of course, but the Federal Reserve chairman had been lobbying on Capitol Hill, urging the legislators to take significant action on the deficits. He warned them that if the deficits were not promptly reduced, interest rates might go even higher. On October 26, Volcker met privately with members of the Senate Finance Committee and urged them to consider various approaches to a major tax increase. Political columnists Rowland Evans and Robert Novak reported: “Finance members left the meeting with this message: if they wanted Volcker’s Fed to ease money, they had better get cracking with tax increases.”31

Shortly afterward, the Finance chairman, Senator Robert Dole of Kansas, did introduce such a measure, a package of revenue increases that would raise $55 billion. President Reagan scotched the idea by repeating what he had said many times before—he would veto any tax-increase legislation that landed on his desk. The “game of chicken” continued between fiscal policy and monetary policy and, so far, neither side had blinked.

The Reagan Administration misunderstood the Fed’s predicament, however. The critics looked at M-l and complained that monetary policy was too tight. At the Federal Reserve, the policy makers looked at the real economy and worried that they had been too loose. By its own standard, the Fed was not being stingy, but too generous.

At the outset, Volcker had vowed to restrain the recovery, to keep it from reaching a runaway boom. But he was behind. At the beginning of 1983, the Federal Open Market Committee had agreed that real economic growth should be held to a modest 3.5 to 4.5 percent, from the last quarter of 1982 to the last quarter of 1983. Instead, the real growth for the year was coming in at 6.3 percent—a much more robust expansion than Volcker had intended.

Despite the Administration’s frequent carping, the Federal Reserve appeared to be providing exactly what the White House had asked for —an accommodative money policy. Cynical Democrats around Washington began to wonder if there had, in fact, been a “deal” between the two. Paul Volcker is reappointed. The economy booms. And Ronald Reagan’s popularity is restored, just in time for 1984.

The political context was more subtle than these conspiracy theories suggested. The Federal Reserve chairman was, no doubt, inhibited by the surrounding political expectations. He had taken the country (and the Reagan Administration) through a long and punishing recession. Now that the nation was enjoying its recovery, Volcker intended to restrain—but there were limits on how far he dared go.

“There was no way Volcker could have managed a tighter monetary policy and gotten away with it,” budget director David Stockman observed. “The Administration would have been all over him. They did a lot of Fed bashing as it was.”

Whatever influence the White House “Fed bashing” may have had on Volcker, he clearly had underestimated the strength of the recovery —and the economy’s ability to charge forward, despite the high real interest rates. Volcker’s monetary policy, in fact, seemed to pose an anomaly: if one looked at the M-l or interest rates, the money policy looked very tight, extraordinarily tight. But if one looked at the real growth of the economy, the monetary policy looked easy.

The explanation was clear to Fed officials—money’s meaning was changing again (and once again leading Milton Friedman into error). After nearly two years of abnormal decline, money’s velocity was beginning to accelerate again—returning to its normal trend line. That meant the swollen money supply that the Fed had already pumped into the economy earlier would now translate into greater economic activity—as M-l turned over faster in different transactions. Maybe, the Fed thought, it was time to take corrective action.

When the Federal Open Market Committee met December 19, some members worried that the economy in 1984 was going to outrun their expectations again, given its momentum and the stimulative fiscal policy. “In particular, it was suggested that the currently high level of confidence among businessmen and large cash flows to business firms favored relatively rapid expansion in business fixed investment,” the FOMC minutes reported.

Others were less sanguine, however. They worried that an increase in interest rates now could quickly depress interest-sensitive sectors like housing and send the dollar still higher in foreign-exchange markets, further damaging manufacturing.

One member, Preston Martin, sounded a stronger warning. The economy looked robust at the moment, Martin acknowledged, but business activity and consumer spending would soon be moderating. The FOMC should be thinking about relaxing interest rates, not raising them.

“To me,” Martin said, “the pressures of inflation weren’t there. The cost push from wages and salaries was very difficult to find anywhere. It seemed to me the probability was now on the other side—that the economy would be slowing down and it might need a little help on interest rates.”

Martin’s senior colleagues at the Fed discounted the vice chairman. They knew Preston Martin was close to the Californians in the Reagan White House and a favorite of the supply siders. They assumed Martin’s economic analysis was heavily influenced by the Administration’s natural desire to insure a roaring economy for the President’s reelection campaign. The other committee members listened politely as Martin reviewed the weakness in the savings and loan industry and described the potential risks, but they were not impressed.

Because the committee members were themselves divided on the economic outlook, they chose a cautious middle course. The December directive called for “maintaining at least the existing degree of restraint.” But it allowed for “the possibility of a slight increase in such restraint, depending on developments. ...”

Even this modest step bothered Preston Martin, who cast his first dissent as a Federal Reserve governor. Any tightening of money, any increase in interest rates, Martin warned, “would present a threat to the sustainability of the economic expansion. Needed business investment would be more expensive, international debt servicing more burdensome, and interest-sensitive housing more vulnerable.”32

The majority was worried about the opposite. The Reagan recovery was barely one year old and booming beyond expectations. The Federal Reserve governors figured they were approaching the hard part— the moment when they would have to decide how much prosperity is too much.

1

bought my first house at 4.75 percent in 1957 [Gramley said]. The most I ever paid on a mortgage was 6 percent. For me, the idea of buying a





