17 “MORNING AGAIN IN AMERICA”


When Paul Volcker appeared before the Senate Banking Committee in early February 1984, Senator William Proxmire reminded him, in a friendly way, of the Fed’s political history.

“Chairman Volcker,” the senator said, “some have argued that the Federal Reserve has historically tried to help the incumbent in the White House during a presidential election year by easing monetary policy. There’s one conspicuous exception to that. In October 1979, the new chairman of the Federal Reserve Board instituted a policy of slowing down the rate of increase in the supply of money and I don’t think anybody could argue that Paul Volcker was a big help to Jimmy Carter in 1980. . . .

“Do you have an understanding with the Administration,” Proxmire asked, “explicit or tacit, that you will follow an accommodative policy in 1984?”

“No, sir,” the chairman answered.

“Will you agree to report to this committee and to the House Banking Committee any instances of the Administration bringing pressure on the Federal Reserve to relax its policies?”

Volcker balked. He was in regular communication with Administration officials and properly so, the Fed chairman explained, but he did not interpret those conversations as political pressure.

“Well, Chairman Volcker, you obviously weren’t born yesterday,” the senator said. “I think you know political pressure when you see

“That’s right,” Volcker said. “That’s why I make a distinction. ...”

Proxmire, the ranking Democrat, was simply inviting the Federal Reserve chairman to come to the Democratic Party for assistance if the Republicans in the White House began to play rough. Most of all, Democrats wanted Volcker to do no more for Ronald Reagan’s political fortunes than he had done for Jimmy Carter’s.

“Now I know you don’t think in political terms and you shouldn’t,” Proxmire told Volcker at another hearing. “But the fact is that this is an election year and I hope you will treat President Ronald Reagan with the same meticulous disregard for political consequences [with which] you treated President Carter. When Vince Lombardi was coach of the Green Bay Packers, a reporter asked one of the players whether Lombardi showed any unfairness in the treatment of players. The player told the reporter, ‘Listen, Coach Lombardi treats us all the same—like dogs.’ ’M

Proxmire’s allusion to football was revealing in itself. The Federal Reserve chairman was cast as the coach. Elected politicians were merely players on the team. In fact, the situation sometimes resembled that relationship. The Federal Reserve chairman could not impose his will, but Paul Volcker regularly instructed Congress and the President on how he thought they should alter their economic policies. When politicians tried to do the same to the Federal Reserve, they were scolded in the press for trespassing on the Fed’s authority. Players were not supposed to criticize the coach, particularly this coach.

“The political stock of the Federal Reserve right now is very high,” Frank Morris of the Boston Fed observed. “The country is breathing a great sigh of relief that we’ve got inflation behind us and the economy is going again. I don’t think this is the proper political season to be knocking the Federal Reserve.”

Most Democrats appeared to agree. Except for a few dedicated critics, Democrats were notably quiet about the Federal Reserve’s extraordinary strategy for restraining the recovery and preventing full employment. Perhaps, in their innermost thoughts, some wished the Fed to succeed. A sterner monetary policy, after all, would hurt the Republicans in ’84, just as it hurt the Democrats back in ’80.

Many Republicans, on the other hand, thought that Volcker was already centrally engaged in the politics of 1984—playing his own rough game to achieve his own purpose. By keeping interest rates high, they suspected, the Fed intended to force the President and Congress to come to terms on major deficit reductions. That would require both spending cuts and tax increases in an election year, neither of which would be helpful to the incumbent President. Senator John Heinz of Pennsylvania confronted Volcker with the suspicions.

“You’ve been in Washington long enough to know that when it comes to getting Congress to bite the tough bullet—in this case, spending—and when it comes to getting the President to bite a tough issue for him—taxes—there’s going to have to be a critical reason for the two aforementioned players to do it,” Heinz told Volcker. “And you’re the only person by following a restrictive, noninflationary monetary policy who can create that crisis.”

“It is not our job to artificially provoke a crisis,” Volcker protested. “We are not going to go out there and conduct a tight-money policy for the sake of trying to bring leverage on the Congress or on the Administration.” 2

Volcker’s repeated complaints about deficits succeeded, however, in diverting the normal political debate, shifting the locus of blame away from monetary policy and toward fiscal policy. “You are playing a kind of game of Russian roulette,” Volcker warned the senators, vaguely allowing that the game might end in another recession. When the stock market heard his words, it dropped 24 points.

“A masterful job of redefinition has been performed by the Fed,” E. F. Hutton told its clients. “It has essentially removed monetary policy from congressional debate. . . . Quite remarkably, high interest rates—which are correctly seen as a threat to this expansion’s long-term viability—have come to be associated with deficits, not with a tightfisted Fed.”3

A guerrilla band of supply-side Republicans tried to reverse the focus by mounting a frontal attack on the Fed. Congressman Jack Kemp and like-minded conservative reformers accused Volcker of preparing to clamp down again on credit, just as the recovery appeared to be moderating, and thus risking yet another recession induced by monetary policy.4

Volcker mostly ignored Kemp’s frequent complaints, but privately the chairman worried about the potential for larger political problems. The Fed was always more vulnerable when the political attacks came from the right. The conservative party was the natural reservoir of support for the central bank and “sound money.” Many traditional Republican conservatives kept their distance from the aggressive young supply siders like Kemp, but if the New York congressman gathered enough Republican supporters for reforming the Fed, they could make common cause with liberal Democrats and perhaps actually do something.

Volcker suspected, moreover, that Jack Kemp was playing point man for the political managers in the White House. The congressman could say things about the Fed that the White House did not wish to say directly itself. The chairman worried aloud to associates that the Fed was being set up—in case anything went wrong with the economy and the President’s campaign.

The White House did, indeed, share Kemp’s nervousness about the recovery and the Federal Reserve, but it was not sure what to do about it. In early January, a few weeks before the congressman’s attack, Treasury Secretary Donald Regan wrote an unusual memorandum for the President, summarizing anxieties expressed by the Cabinet Council on Economic Affairs: “All members of the Cabinet Council agree that a sustained period of near zero growth in the money supply poses the strong threat of a recession sometime in 1984 and is clearly undesirable. However, the ambiguity of Federal Reserve policy intentions and the accuracy of the policy indicators create some uncertainty regarding the actual course of monetary policy.” Regan promised to keep the President posted, as the situation became clearer.5

Representative Kemp, meanwhile, continued what the Democrats had abandoned—a legislative campaign to reform the Fed and reduce its political independence. “We need not sit by helplessly, awaiting a third economic recession engineered by the Fed in four years,” Kemp complained. “Congress is constitutionally authorized to coin money and regulate its value. The American people can act through Congress to bring monetary policy into line with the Administration’s growth-oriented fiscal policies by passing reform legislation.”6

Dozens of Republicans, mostly younger members who admired Kemp’s style and ideas, signed up as cosponsors for his measure to change the Federal Reserve. Among other things, the Kemp bill would make the Secretary of the Treasury a member of the Federal Open Market Committee—restoring the original arrangement of 1913 that gave the Chief Executive direct access to the central bank’s deliberations and some influence over its decisions. The Republican reform legislation, though it never advanced, would be brandished from time to time like a threatening sword throughout the campaign season.

The Democratic Party, meanwhile, came to the Federal Reserve’s defense. When White House officials planted nasty gibes at Volcker in the press, leading members of the opposition party answered them. Senator Lloyd Bentsen of Texas, the chairman of the Senate Democratic Campaign Committee for the 1984 elections, warned: “I cannot help but reflect on the possibility that the Administration is trying to set up the Fed chairman as a scapegoat in case the economic recovery goes sour between now and the first Tuesday in November.” The Fed was doing a good job, the senator declared, and ought to be left alone.

Any problems that developed in the economy would be blamed on the President and the huge federal deficits that flowed from Reagan tax cuts in 1981 (tax cuts that, incidentally, Bentsen and most Democratic senators had voted for).7

For the 1984 campaign, the historic positions of the two dominant political parties were reversed. The Democratic Party felt trapped by its own past, still tarnished by the inflationary anxieties experienced under Jimmy Carter, still tagged as the reckless “big spenders.” Democratic leaders decided they must convince the public of their newly developed sense of responsibility and so they campaigned for fiscal discipline. Invoking the party’s old liberal agenda—full employment, low interest rates, rapid economic growth, aggressive federal management of prosperity—might simply remind voters of the party’s old self.8

The President’s party, meanwhile, had effectively abandoned the old Republican orthodoxy that the Democrats were now attempting to mimic. Republicans, it was true, remained steadfast in their rhetorical loyalty to the idea of a balanced federal budget and fiscal order. In actual performance, however, the conservative party had embraced the opposite—an economy driven by increased federal spending and increased debt, the most stimulative fiscal policy ever attempted in peacetime. The old Republican complaint—that deficit spending ultimately led to ruinous inflation—was conveniently discarded in the presence of Republican deficits.

The role reversal in the two political parties’ traditional philosophies was deeper than election-year posturing. Aside from the obvious hypocrisies, it at least suggested that both parties were breaking free of their traditional moorings and, for better or worse, casting about for new sets of beliefs. In terms of managing the economy, what did the Republican Party now stand for? Or the Democrats? It was no longer so easy to summarize either one.

At the very least, new boundaries were being defined for the central debate of American politics: the government’s management of the economy through taxes and spending and federal deficits. If a conservative regime could accept $200 billion deficits with equanimity, what would be the new standard for imprudent management in the future —deficits of $300 or $400 billion? Certainly, neither party was soon going to seriously pursue the old Republican objective of balanced budgets. The twisted political alignments of 1984 rested on this paradox: the old “liberal” approach to political management of the economy, denounced as reckless and inflationary, supposedly discredited by two decades of failed promises, seemed to be working wonderfully well for the Republican Party.

Republicans, in fact, now held the symbolic high ground that the Democratic Party had once owned in national politics—the party of growth and prosperity. Through the campaign, the President would be the confident apostle of optimism and limitless opportunity, while the Democratic opposition assumed the role of public scold. The Democratic Party invoked “fairness” as its theme, but it muted the old liberal standards. This shift in emphasis was not entirely new. The Democrats had been shifting rightward in their economic perspective for some years, exemplified by the financial deregulation legislation of 1980. By 1984, instead of attacking the high interest rates, Democrats came to the defense of the Federal Reserve. Partisan stalemate was once again turned to the Fed’s advantage.

That fall voters asked a reasonable question—what was so bad about the huge deficits if the economy was flourishing?—and the Democrats never provided a convincing answer. To do so, they would have had to explain the Federal Reserve’s “game of chicken” and the consequences of high interest rates. Instead, their presidential nominee, the former Vice President, Walter Mondale, would bravely propose a painful remedy—a major tax increase and substantial budget reductions to restore fiscal order to Washington. For his part, President Reagan bravely proposed an endless vista of “good times” all across America.

Preston Martin, the vice chairman of the Federal Reserve Board and the only Reagan appointee, did not act like a central banker. He was a gregarious western businessman, hearty and direct in manner, a man who sprinkled his conversation with expressions like “hell’s bells” and “my goodness.” Central bankers, Martin once joked, “are expected to look and act as if they are moving from one funeral to the next.”9 Preston Martin acted as though he was on his way to a family wedding.

Given his personal style, it was easy for Preston Martin’s colleagues at the Fed to underestimate him, though the vice chairman had ample practical experience in finance. He had been a housing developer and financier himself. He had chaired the Federal Home Loan Bank Board, which regulated the savings and loan industry. In Los Angeles, Martin had developed his own successful mortgage insurance company, which he had sold to Sears, Roebuck. As chairman of Sears’s Seraco Enterprises, Martin was instrumental in making Sears a major player in financial services, through purchase of the Dean Witter Reynolds brokerage.

Still, as he was acutely aware, he did not speak the language of the System. “I became quite a bore,” Martin acknowledged. “I reminded them of the thrifts, of small business, of housing. I could see the ears turn off around the table when I made my little speech. But I made it anyway.”

It wasn’t merely style. Martin saw things differently, and in the opening months of 1984, his perspective was strikingly at odds with the economic analysis of Volcker and other senior governors. They saw the economy roaring forward too fast. Martin saw it slowing down. They thought the Fed should assert some pressure with higher interest rates, lest things get out of control. Martin thought the economic recovery would soon need help and the Fed ought to be thinking about lowering interest rates, not raising them.

A staff officer of the Federal Open Market Committee observed:

Martin doesn’t have much influence. He always has to say something. His remarks will always be reflecting what is generally understood to be the Administration’s position. Or he will give an update on the thrifts and the housing industry, but it’s not particularly sophisticated. His mind operates on the level of platitudes, and he seems not to understand that a good analysis and argument can change minds.

“He speaks his piece,” said Charles Partee. “He doesn’t seem to me to be trying to bring a group of people with him. He just doesn’t structure his argument in a way that you could capture votes by what he’s saying. He’s usually isolated.”

The informal knowledge that Preston Martin wished to succeed Paul Volcker as Federal Reserve chairman did not enhance his influence around the boardroom table. When the vice chairman argued for an easier monetary policy, others inferred that he was simply ingratiating himself with the Reagan White House at Volcker’s expense. “It’s hard to figure what he’s doing and why,” an aide to Volcker said. “I can see some consistency in his arguing for an easier policy, but it’s not in his own interest to take issue with this particular chairman. Why do you want to pick a fight with Godzilla?”

Alone and discounted by his colleagues, Preston Martin persisted nonetheless in making the case for relaxing monetary policy. The economy, it was true, had accelerated in the first quarter of 1984, surprising everyone with the rapid expansion. Real GNP appeared to be growing at 6 to 7 percent, perhaps even faster. But Martin’s business soundings convinced him that sales and production would actually be tapering off in the weeks ahead. Another increase in interest rates at this point could be harmful.

The moment of truth arrived at the March 26 meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee. On its face, it sounded like another dreary argument among economists over competing economic forecasts, but the stakes this time were much more fateful. In direct terms, the Federal Reserve governors were arguing over how much of the booming prosperity they were going to permit Americans to enjoy. The President’s generous campaign promises notwithstanding, the central bank would decide the question for itself. Was it time, in William McChesney Martin’s celebrated phrase, to take away the punch bowl, now that the party was going good? It was. In a deeper sense, the Fed’s governors were implicitly deciding a question of political power too. Did the Federal Reserve claim the authority to cut against all the obvious public aspirations for the unfolding prosperity? It did. And would it have the nerve? It would.

Preston Martin tried to make the case for keeping the robust expansion as vigorous as possible. His own reading of business conditions told him that the boom was about to subside anyway on its own. And there was virtually no sign anywhere that price inflation was about to resume. Why should the Fed step in and spoil things?

I relied on the business data from the Federal Reserve Bank directors a bit more than some of my colleagues [Martin explained]. These directors are people from business who are not looking back; they’re looking forward. Their bonuses depend on whether those retail sales goals are realized. The forward indicators looked like this huge surge was calming down and it was going to be a more normal recovery. Inventories had come into line with sales. Wages were not threatening—this was the year of the labor give backs. The boom was coming down. Things really were under control. So I concluded that inflation’s not around the corner and we could afford not to tighten.

Within the Board of Governors, Martin’s plea was almost bound to fail. Arguing the opposite case in the strongest terms was the second most influential member of the board, Lyle Gramley. “The economy is just growing too fast,” Gramley grumbled to associates, “and we let it happen.” The present growth rate would lead to trouble down the road. The Fed must ignore the risks of political attack and assert its restraint now. Gramley’s argument was aimed not at Preston Martin but at Paul Volcker.

“Lyle Gramley is kind of the conscience of the Fed right now,” David Jones, the Fed watcher at Aubrey G. Lanston, explained. “Volcker is behind on where he should be in tightening. Gramley feels the same way. He’s very objective and he’s usually right.”10

Gramley himself explained why he took a stern position: “If people say I’m a hawk, there is one reason for it—it’s an acute awareness that all of these gains can be lost. All of these costs could be for naught, if we don’t keep control of inflation.” Gramley was a “System man” and he remembered the 1970s when the Federal Reserve endured its most scornful criticism.

For Gramley and like-minded governors, the choice could no longer be avoided. The FOMC had declined to alter credit conditions at its January meeting, and all the economic news since then told them they had grossly underestimated the force of the expansion. In fact, the economic news was spectacular.

Housing starts jumped in February to an annual rate of 2.2 million units, the strongest construction boom since 1978. Early in the month, auto sales were up 33 percent over the year before. The Commerce Department’s survey of businesses reported spending on new plants and equipment would increase in 1984 by a bullish 9.4 percent—then the estimate was revised upward to 13.6 percent. Unemployment was declining steadily, from 10 percent the summer before to 7.8 percent in March.

Paul Volcker worried publicly about the “very strong” economy and whether “bottlenecks” might develop in production and labor that could drive prices upward. “I don’t think it is in our interest to see it expand at a maximum rate for two or three quarters,” Volcker said, “if it is going to last only two or three quarters.”11

The bond market was also distressed by the startlingly good news from the buoyant economy. Beginning in early February, long-term interest rates had begun to creep upward and the Fed had allowed market pressures to edge short-term rates higher too. Perhaps, the policy makers thought, this was the beginning of the long-predicted “crowding out”—a collision in credit markets between the federal government’s borrowing and the demand for loans from business and consumers.

Stable prices had been secured for more than a year and a half, yet the bond investors were still skeptical. Would the Fed accommodate or would it stand fast? The long-term investors still claimed to be worried that resurgent price inflation was imminent. By late March, the rate on twenty-year Treasury bonds had risen 80 basis points, to above 12 percent.

Wall Street cynics thought this was the point where the Fed might cave in—retreat before the normal political pressures of an election year and yield to faster economic growth. But others took Volcker at his word. David Jones predicted: “The Fed will be tougher than anyone thinks.” E. F. Hutton assured its clients: “The Fed will play brakeman for this expansion.”12

The Federal Reserve chairman had already received opposite instructions from the President. On February 15, Volcker was summoned to the Oval Office for another session intended to put him on notice. Like his earlier meetings with Ronald Reagan, this one was mostly generalities about money and economic growth and inflation. At one point, Volcker delivered one of his rambling meditations on the economy that was so contorted that afterward the President asked Donald Regan and James Baker what the man had said. Neither of them could say.

The White House really delivered its intended message, afterward, in public, by pointedly alerting the press. The President, reporters were told, had asked Volcker to insure that monetary policy would not interrupt healthy economic growth in 1984. “All I am asking ... in monetary policy is that we have an increase that is commensurate with that growth that can continue the recovery without returning us to inflation,” the President told reporters.

Anonymous White House aides put it somewhat more sharply: the Fed must not tighten. Volcker was told, in effect, “We don’t care if you err on the top side of the targets, but we do care if you err on the low side,” one senior official explained to The Wall Street Journal. Columnists Evans and Novak described the White House warning in the most melodramatic terms: “Reagan won’t send the Marines down Constitution Avenue to the Federal Reserve, but he seems determined to prevent the central bank from triggering another recession to calm inflationary nightmares of the creditor class.”

A week later at a press conference, the President stated his objective more coherently: “I think the Federal Reserve is now on a path of a money-supply increase that is consistent with a sound recovery without inflation. To go one way in excess, they could cause more inflation and I don’t think they are planning that. They could go the other way, tighten the strings too much and interfere with the recovery, and I don’t think they’re going to do that.”

Even these mild efforts to influence the Fed were scolded by the press. “The White House is stalking the Federal Board again,” a Washington Post editorial complained, “in the kind of maneuver that usually turns out to be clever but not wise.”13

Thus, when the FOMC met in late March, it was another of those excruciating moments when the Federal Reserve had to choose between its audiences. Which power center would the Fed respond to— the White House or the bond market? One side or the other was sure to be disappointed by the FOMC’s decision and possibly quite angry. Volcker’s old friend and mentor Robert V. Roosa of the investment-banking house of Brown Brothers Harriman described the dilemma: “They are really in a trap with anything they try to do in this situation.”14

Inside the FOMC, Volcker was also in the middle. Lyle Gramley was arguing for sterner action than Volcker had in mind, given all the competing considerations in the “real world.” On the other side, Preston Martin, the only businessman on the board, was warning that tightening credit now could choke off the recovery prematurely. Martin’s warning sounded like a preview of what the governors expected to hear from Republicans if Martin was right.

As usual, the debate was conducted not in the broad terms of national goals or social equity but in the esoteric language of monetary analysis. The governors’ arguments focused on the obscure measurement known as “capacity utilization,” a statistic meant to convey how much of America’s productive capacity was now active and how much remained idle. Gramley, joined by Wallich and Partee, argued that capacity utilization, though still quite low, was rising at a threateningly rapid rate. Unemployment was still high, they acknowledged, and prices were flat, but if the Fed did not move swiftly to restrain now, it might soon be too late. The economy would quickly reach its full capacity and another round of inflation could be touched off by the bidding for scarce labor, scarce goods.

“Capacity utilization is a useless standard,” Preston Martin countered. The measure, as everyone knew, was based on notoriously unreliable data. More important, as Martin argued, the capacity level of domestic manufacturing was irrelevant in the global economy because U.S. companies and labor had to compete worldwide on prices. It made no sense, he pleaded, to imagine that American corporations and labor unions might somehow bid up wages and prices at the very time they were being hammered down by foreign competitors. Thanks to the rising dollar, American prices were being held down by the cheap imports—and the world had unused productive capacity that was vastly in excess. Martin’s analysis did not persuade.15

“The two groups had very different views of what was forthcoming in the economy,” Martin said. “It was pretty fundamental.” If the Fed tightened, Martin warned, the young economic recovery would be suppressed prematurely, robbed of its forward thrust. The “System men” were worried about the opposite—that there was too much momentum.

“I could understand the strong feelings of Wallich and Gramley,” Martin said. “They had been in that building in the 1970s and they had seen inflation eat up values and they didn’t want to see that happen again.” Indeed, the memory of the seventies was invoked by Gramley and others in their arguments. The Fed must stand up now or risk the same ridicule later. To Preston Martin, they sounded like generals refighting the last war instead of the present one. “I haven’t seen signs of an overheated economy,” Martin declared. “I have seen overheated economists.”16

The chairman agreed with Gramley and Wallich and the others. The Fed must brake. But Volcker did not wish to brake quite as hard as they proposed. Volcker chose the demands of the bond market over the political community’s, but, typically, he attempted to fashion a compromise between the two extremes. His tightening would likely upset the White House Republicans, but it would not upset them nearly as much as what Gramley and Wallich wanted. The move proposed by the chairman was intended to be more in the nature of what Frank Morris had called a “mid-course correction.” The FOMC directive would order a measured tightening of credit—pushing short-term interest rates up gradually, no more than 100 to 150 basis points.

Since November 1982, the Fed had been keeping the Federal Funds rate remarkably stable. The prescribed target range was between 6 and 10 percent, and the interest rate for overnight reserve borrowing among banks had been averaging a little above 9.5 percent. Now Volcker proposed that the target range for the Fed Funds rate be raised to 11.5 percent, enough leeway to permit an increase of no more than 150 basis points in short-term interest rates if credit pressures required it. In addition, the FOMC had restored M-l as an operating target, now that money velocity had returned to a normal trend line, and the chairman’s directive proposed “greater restraint” if M-l grew faster than 6.5 percent.

That was not enough for Lyle Gramley. He thought the Fed should restrain more now or else face a worse choice later on, closer to the election. Henry Wallich agreed and they both dissented. It was Gram-ley’s first dissent in his four years on the Board of Governors. “I don’t dissent,” he said, “unless it’s really a fundamental disagreement, a feeling that the course of policy is really a mistake.”

Preston Martin dissented too, but for opposite reasons.

Every time I dissented, people would say I was doing it because I was a Reagan appointee and was worried about the election [he said]. I was very careful not to have contact, either by telephone or in person, with my California friends, with the White House or Treasury during that period because I knew people would think it was political. But that’s what they said, understandably. I would probably have said the same thing. It goes with the territory.

The effects of the Fed’s tightening were visible almost immediately in the financial markets. The Federal Funds rate moved up about 50 basis points a week after the meeting. The key interest rate also bounced up and down more erratically, a signal to Fed watchers that the Open Market Desk had now returned to targeting the supply of money reflected by M-l and the other aggregates. That meant interest rates would be allowed to fluctuate more freely, pushed up or down by the demand pressures in the money market.

The consequences were not moderate, however. The move was more like applying a choke-hold to interest-sensitive economic sectors, just as they were charging forward. The mortgage interest rate moved up sharply from around 13 percent a month later. By June, it was at 15 percent and the housing boom retreated swiftly from its February peak. Rates on auto loans went up, too, and auto sales declined accordingly. The economic expansion was confronted now with tighter credit, a rising price for borrowed money. Even though the unemployment rate was still close to 8 percent, the Federal Reserve was applying the brakes.

The bond market was pleased. “The deceleration of the economy is welcome news to the bond market, which has been battered for several weeks,” Shearson American Express informed its investor clients. “ . . . Despite all the talk of a tighter policy at the Federal Reserve, the monetary authorities have been slow to take decisive action. . . .”17

But the Federal Reserve’s decision to play brakeman proved to be much more than a “mid-course correction.” It effectively marked the end of Ronald Reagan’s boom. It drew a line across the future’s potential and defined the limits for the unfolding prosperity. The vigorous recovery that had begun eighteen months before would lose its strength rapidly—just as Preston Martin had warned—and that strength would never be regained.

Such a momentous decision by the government—a decision to halt the surging economy—might have been expected to provoke great controversy, especially since the decision was made by an obscure group of unelected technocrats in defiance of the President’s wishes and in the midst of an election campaign. Yet there was no public outcry. The “brakeman” was allowed to throw the switch in virtual privacy. Of all the institutions of Washington, none was more deferential toward the Federal Reserve than the press. The news media did not report the significance of what the Fed was doing to the economy, not then and not even later when the effects of the Fed’s tightening were fully visible.

Within two months, unemployment would reach its low point— stuck at 7.1 percent—and then begin to creep back upward. Manufacturing’s capacity utilization, which had so worried the senior governors, peaked shortly thereafter—far below its potential—and began declining. The dollar’s international value was driven still higher by the increase in U.S. interest rates, and the competitive damage was deepened for all the trade-sensitive sectors of the American economy, from farming to autos to machine tools. Within a matter of months, the Federal Reserve would find itself struggling with the opposite problem—trying to re-stimulate the economy to avert a recession.

Preston Martin, the businessman disparaged for his platitudes and sloppy thinking, had been right about the future. The economy decelerated more abruptly than any of the others expected. The Fed’s decision to raise interest rates was, as Martin had warned, braking an engine that was already slowing down.

The technocrats who ran the central bank were not only fallible— “not infrequently wrong,” as Lyle Gramley once admitted—but they also seemed incapable of listening seriously to competing perspectives. Inside the Fed, Martin’s opinions were dismissed as politically inspired—unscientific—much as Nancy Teeters’ dissents had been discounted during the long recession because she was regarded as a “knee-jerk liberal.” Yet Martin’s analysis of what lay ahead for the American economy proved to be more accurate than the expert forecasts from Paul Volcker, Lyle Gramley, Henry Wallich and the Fed’s other respected voices.

“I was the only one dissenting on that side,” Martin reflected, “and I was right. My God, we just couldn’t afford to have an eighteen-month expansion, but it was already slowing down.”

If anything, Preston Martin became even less popular among his colleagues at the Federal Reserve Board. They did not concede that he had been correct in March. Soon Martin was making even more dire forecasts about where the economy was headed.

That’s when I began to talk about a “growth recession” [Martin said]. My colleagues didn’t like that phrase. It doesn’t have a lot of study behind it; it’s kind of a journalistic phrase. But that is what we were headed for —a growth recession. Unemployment began creeping up again and we didn’t have much real growth. We don’t go into a recession, but we also have growth of 2 percent or less.

As the recovery deteriorated, Preston Martin continued to dissent against Paul Volcker’s management of money, usually alone. Each time, he was characterized in the press (and in the hallway gossip at the Fed) as politically ambitious, a tool of the White House. But if one searched through the policy record of the Federal Reserve during the Reagan recovery, Preston Martin’s dissents were like a crude but reliable leading indicator for turns in the economy. His worries usually came true. Certainly, he was consistently closer to the mark than the other assembled experts at the Federal Reserve Board.

The vice chairman seemed good-humored about his lonely position and the occasional slurs. If he resented the fact that Fed colleagues ignored his opinions, he kept the resentment to himself. He did not try to adapt to their methods of analysis or accept their perspective. Meeting after meeting, the vice chairman continued to deliver the same rambling speeches, knowing that others would pay little attention.

The central bank had its own unwritten protocol and Preston Martin, with a bitter edge in his voice, observed it. “You don’t go back to your colleagues and say: T told you so. I told you so in March,’” Martin explained. “Oh, no, you never, never do that.”

Governor Charles Partee sounded defensive, but did not apologize for the Federal Reserve’s decision. “You can look back in retrospect and say now, of course, knowing the economy grew much more slowly from that point on, you can say, ‘Sure, we could have let it grow a little longer,’” Partee conceded. “But, as a principle of monetary management, I think it was correct to slow things down.”

Paul Volcker was unwilling to concede even that much.

In their own narrow terms, perhaps Volcker and Partee were right. It wasn’t a mistake if one accepted the paternal values that guided the Federal Reserve. This was its role in life, to decide what was good for others, even when it knew that the others might disagree. To the Fed, therefore, it did not seem wrong to break the booming economy, just as Americans were enjoying the new glow of prosperity. It was the Federal Reserve’s responsibility to maintain order and so it did.

The governors, it was true, had been mistaken in the economic analysis that led them to the fateful decision, but it was not simply their mistakes. Every agent of government will make mistakes at one time or another, just as every human errs. The heart of the matter was the autocratic mind-set of the institution itself, the peculiar perspective that nearly always led the Federal Reserve in the same direction, toward the same sort of choice.

The policy makers were voting, after all, to avoid the one kind of economic risk that mattered most to their institution—the risk to money—and to authorize other kinds of economic loss—lost jobs and incomes, lost production and opportunity, lost equity in society. Even though their fears of inflation proved utterly unfounded, even though the real economy suffered grievously as a result, this was the posture of caution that the Federal Reserve would always find most comfortable. It was the choice its own constituencies in finance and banking would always applaud. In their own minds, central bankers could never be wrong in principle so long as they came down on the side of money.

If any single moment could convey the larger political meaning of the Federal Reserve, perhaps this was such a moment. Baldly stated, the Fed’s decision meant that the demands of capital triumphed and democracy lost. Behind the economics, money management was usually a choice over whom to please and whom to disappoint, a political question of who would be made to take the loss, wealth holders or wage earners. In this pivotal instance, as it had done so often in its history, the central bank was deciding to defend wealth and let workers take the loss. The financial side of capitalism would be protected from risk, even excessively enhanced. Enterprise in the productive economy would be restrained, even injured. Opportunities would be canceled, ambitions checked, so that the owners of money would feel more secure about their wealth. The Federal Reserve’s ideological values always were inclined toward that choice.

The orderly world described in economics textbooks was, thus, inverted. Economics taught that finance existed to facilitate business and commerce, that the real economy was the core of capitalism and that finance merely served it like a veil. When money's value was given paramount priority, the order was turned upside down. The diverse energies of the real economy, the vast aspirations of Americans generally, would now be suppressed in order to protect the interests of money.

The civic mythology of representative democracy was also exquisitely mocked by these events. In the middle of a presidential election season, the President was impotent. It was not his decision and he could not stop the Federal Reserve from making it. The elected representatives in Congress were not even consulted. Neither branch could object in candid terms without accentuating its own weakness. The American public could hardly protest either, for the public did not know that the unelected government in Washington had decided to end the boom.

Jim Baker was furious and said so in the bluntest terms. The President’s chief of staff was attending a private dinner party, surrounded by friends and White House associates. His dinner partners, including Walter Wriston of Citibank, were aghast as Baker vented his anger at Paul Volcker.

“We made a deal,” Baker said, according to one who was at his table. “The deal was that if we got the budget under control, the Fed would ease up. That’s our part of the bargain. We did our part and now the Fed is double-crossing us. The Fed is tightening.”

The White House had not actually gotten the budget under control, but Baker had worked hard at it and made some progress. After much negotiating and arranging, Baker had persuaded the reluctant President to endorse a $150 billion three-year deficit reduction package, including what Ronald Reagan most resisted, tax increases totaling $48 billion. “A down payment” on the deficits, the President called it. The Administration’s deficit proposal was a long way from congressional approval (and most of it would be abandoned in the pressures of election-year politics), but Baker still felt “double-crossed” by Paul Volcker.

James Baker had assumed control over most of the major issues in the Reagan White House, including surveillance of the Fed’s monetary policy. Theoretical arguments among the Administration’s competing economists continued to swirl around him, but Baker decided what the White House would say or do. Without title, he was also functioning as campaign manager for the President’s re-election and the Federal Reserve was one of his principal anxieties.

“Baker had the general worries of a full-time political manager,” David Stockman said. “He thought he had a commitment that nobody was going to screw up the economy in the election year and now everybody was telling him that the numbers were bad. He didn’t want anything that would screw up the economic environment, that’s all.”

On April 6, the Federal Reserve Board raised its Discount rate to 9 percent, the first change since December 1982. The Discount increase followed in step with the tightening that the Federal Open Market Committee had already authorized. The White House had a sense of what the Fed was doing, but it could not easily react to vague suspicions. On Tuesday, May 8, a tangible event presented itself. Commercial banks raised the prime rate for the second time in six weeks. The White House jumped on the Fed.

“We are disappointed that the prime interest rate has increased to 12.5 percent,” Larry Speakes, the White House press spokesman, declared. “Although the economy has been growing at a healthy pace and inflation remains at a low level, it appears the money supply is not accommodating real economic growth.”

Baker and Richard Darman, his deputy, sharpened the criticism of the Fed, speaking as the anonymous “senior officials” who were quoted in various press accounts. Other Administration officials were instructed to join the chorus.

For Treasury Secretary Donald Regan, this required a sudden turnabout. On Sunday, he had appeared on a television talk show and declared that the Fed was doing a good job. On Wednesday, Regan attacked the Fed. “You bet your life this has us worried,” the Treasury Secretary told reporters. Commerce Secretary Malcolm Baldrige added his voice. “I hope the Fed is looking far enough ahead,” Bald-rige said.

By Friday, Donald Regan was warning that the Fed might produce another recession if it did not swiftly change its monetary policy. “This is not a campaign against the Fed,” Regan said. “It’s a campaign against high interest rates.”

The Administration’s frantic flurry of “Fed bashing” was orchestrated by Baker and Darman, who figured that a public campaign to intimidate Volcker might as well be tried, since private persuasion had clearly failed. At the very least, the White House officials hoped the public criticism would establish a “political predicate” for finger pointing later if the economy did fall apart before the election. “There’s a pure political purpose, in terms of laying off blame,” an Administration official explained.18

Aside from the political objective, Baker and Darman also thought they were right about the economics. For months, they had been listening more attentively to the supply-side advocates, Jack Kemp and Jude Wanniski, argue that Volcker’s tight-money strategy could stall out the recovery right in the middle of the campaign. Now events seemed to be confirming the warnings. Within the Reagan Administration, the influence of the competing ideological camps had shifted again. Monetarist advisers, who had been so influential back in 1981 urging a stern monetary policy, were now eclipsed. The supply siders, whose earlier complaints about the Fed had been ignored, were ascendant. At least Baker and Darman took their warnings seriously.

“I said, let’s forget about those monetary aggregates, let’s keep sufficient growth to keep this wonderful recovery going,” an Administration official explained. “There isn’t any sign that inflation is coming back and there’s a serious risk that the Fed is too tight. What I meant was that there was room for additional growth and no sign of inflation. I think I was right about that. Volcker wasn’t letting the recovery go far enough.”

The economic argument made by the White House political advisers was perfectly plausible, a legitimate criticism of the Fed’s policy that turned out to be correct. “If you looked at all the economic factors,” Richard Darman said, “any reasonable person could conclude that there was no inflationary risk in loosening and substantial danger on the other side. We had the merits on our side. It was politically desirable, but it was also reasonable economics.”

Yet Volcker brushed the White House comments aside as political complaints. The Fed was used to attack in election seasons. Politicians were expected to defer to the higher judgment of economics. That standard was enforced by the news media, which, once again, criticized the White House for meddling in the Fed’s decisions.

The bankers on the Federal Advisory Council, when they met with the Fed in early May, congratulated the governors on their recent tightening. The bankers took note of “the highly charged political atmosphere” and warned that this turbulence “increases the contribution that monetary policy must make to maintaining confidence. . . .”19

Volcker, in any case, had his own allies in the White House, and they swiftly mobilized to defend the Federal Reserve. Like other episodes in the Reagan Presidency, when the senior advisers battled for the President’s mind, they often did their fighting in public. Martin Feldstein, the CEA chairman, dissented in public. The Fed’s tightening was “not inappropriate,” he said, contradicting the White House “senior officials.”

“I think it would be a terrible mistake to try to push interest rates down by expansionary monetary policy,” Feldstein told reporters. He said he was “frankly surprised” to hear the Treasury Secretary advocate the opposite.

The budget director, David Stockman, likewise began lobbying against the anti-Fed broadsides emanating from his White House colleagues. “We called the wrath of God down on Baker after he put that out,” Stockman said. “We got lots of Wall Street types to call him to say, ‘My God, the markets will go crazy.’ So many bricks came down on his head, Baker must have wondered, ‘What the hell did I get into?’”

The biggest brick from Wall Street hit on Monday, May 14, when the financial markets opened. The bond market choked on a new issue of thirty-year Treasury bonds and dealers found it difficult to find customers for the $4.75 billion in new government debt. Stock prices declined but bond prices were hit hardest, off by nearly one and a third points. The markets may have simply been reacting to the rising interest rates, but Wall Street analysts blamed the collapse in bonds on the “Fed bashing” in Washington.

The contending factions at the White House quickly negotiated a truce. They agreed that the President must hold an impromptu press conference to calm the financial markets and still the controversy. Federal Reserve officials “are doing the best they can,” Reagan declared to reporters, nullifying all previous comments to the contrary. The Administration’s public campaign to pressure the Fed ended as abruptly as it had begun.

At the Fed, some governors were more amused than intimidated. “This Administration has been weird,” Nancy Teeters said. “On Sunday, the Treasury Secretary is on TV saying we are doing a good job. Then interest rates bump up on Monday and on Wednesday he’s attacking us. Then the President has a press conference and says we’re doing fine. Within ten days, we went from being white hats to black hats and back again.”

Inside the White House, the leading “Fed bashers” proclaimed the exercise a success. “Darman said we’ve accomplished our purpose,” Stockman said. “We’ve given a warning to the Fed. It’s a shot across the bow and now the Fed knows what we expect between now and November.”

Both Baker and Darman told associates that their public complaints probably prevented the Fed from adopting an even tougher policy. Volcker was in the middle among his own colleagues at the Fed and the frontal attacks from the White House would make it easier for the Fed chairman to resist the stronger action urged by Gramley and other governors. “They might have been even tighter if we hadn’t done that,” an Administration official said.

The Federal Reserve, it was true, did hold off from a further decision to tighten money and credit. But the policy makers at the central bank were inhibited by a much larger event than the White House sniping. The Fed was confronted, simultaneously, with another major shock to the American financial system—the collapse of the Continental Illinois National Bank.

The “run” began in Tokyo on Wednesday, May 9, the same day Donald Regan was attacking the Federal Reserve back in Washington. The Commodity News Service had carried a brief wire story reporting “rumors” that a Japanese bank might acquire Continental Illinois in Chicago. When the item was picked up by a Japanese news service, the translator turned “rumors” into “disclosure” and Far Eastern investors holding Continental’s certificates of deposit panicked at the implications. That day, as much as $1 billion in Asian money fled from the Continental Illinois bank.

The “run” spread around the globe, with the speed of electronic communications. When financial markets opened in Europe on Thursday, withdrawals from Continental reached the same awesome scale, driven by the same fears. Something was obviously wrong with the Chicago bank. Prudent investors would simply get out of its paper, at least until they could learn more.

In Washington, the Comptroller of the Currency, Todd Conover, issued a vaguely reassuring statement: “The Comptroller’s Office is not aware of any significant changes in the bank’s operations, as reflected in its published financial statements, that would serve as a basis for these rumors.”

Financial markets, foreign and domestic, were not taken in by his artful phrasing. Major depositors worldwide, from brokerages to money-market funds to other commercial banks, continued to pull their money out of Continental CDs and the “run” worsened. Before the close of business on Friday, Continental had to borrow $3.6 billion at the Discount window of the Chicago Federal Reserve Bank in order to make up for its lost deposits. And, in Washington, the heads of the three bank regulatory agencies—the Comptroller, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Federal Reserve—gathered in Paul Volcker’s office to deal with the crisis.

As swiftly as that, the nation’s seventh-largest commercial bank was brought to ruin. But, as Volcker and the other regulators well understood, Continental’s collapse had not begun with an erroneous news report forty-eight hours earlier. The real origins went back to the bank’s aggressive lending strategy during the late 1970s and early 1980s when the bank was hailed for its brilliant management. The federal regulators had not intervened then to restrain Continental’s high-growth strategy, nor had they taken firm action after July 1982, when the failure of the Penn Square Bank in Oklahoma City revealed how reckless Continental’s loan officers had been. The Chicago bank was burdened with the $1 billion in bad loans it had purchased from Penn Square and at least another billion from other ventures. But nothing of consequence had been done by Washington regulators to force the bank to clean up its weaknesses. At the time, Roger Anderson, Continental’s ambitious chairman, boasted to bank employees: “We have no intention of pulling in our horns.”

Indeed, through 1982 and 1983, Continental continued to distribute its regular $2-per-share dividends to stockholders as though nothing had happened. Late in 1983, a new examination by the Comptroller revealed that the bank’s condition had deteriorated steadily since the summer of 1982 and was now in even worse shape. Its earnings were declining and the management was maintaining appearances by selling off subsidiaries in order to keep up the dividend payments.

William Isaac, chairman of the FDIC, said he asked the other federal regulators why nothing had been done to discipline the bank. “Why aren’t we cutting the dividend? We should have done it back in ’82,” Isaac said. “The response from the Fed and the Comptroller was: ‘You’re right, we probably should have done it in ’82. But now, if we do it, the markets will panic.’ I didn’t disagree with that.”20

Investors were already catching on anyway, at least in American financial markets. Continental continued to offer a much higher rate on its CDs than other money-center banks, a sure sign it was having trouble raising the $8 billion it needed to borrow every day to fund its operations. Even more telling, Continental sold off its profitable credit-card operation to another major bank early in 1984 in a desperate effort to raise funds. “They were dismembering the carcass,” Isaac said.

Roger Anderson abruptly retired in February. The bank’s stock, which had traded as high as $40 three years before, was declining sharply, down to $12 by early May. Continental Illinois was, in fact, making discreet inquiries among other multinational banks about a merger or take-over, though not apparently in Japan. As American money became more wary, the bank had to rely more and more heavily on investors in Europe and Asia to lend it the billions needed for daily operating funds. When the foreign money suddenly caught on to the dangers, the game was over. The global “run” began.21

Back in the summer of 1982, Paul Volcker had privately urged the Chicago bank directors to take drastic remedial action, but he had not ordered them to do so. After the collapse, though he did not reveal what he had attempted, Volcker obliquely conceded some regret that he had not been more forceful. The chairman told a Senate hearing: “. . . one could argue—and the argument becomes even better with hindsight—that it would have been better to look at the dividends right then. I think, with hindsight, that’s an unassailable argument.”22

At the Fed, bank regulators felt, with some merit, that a large share of the blame belonged to William Isaac and the FDIC. By insisting that the Penn Square Bank be liquidated in 1982, with huge losses for “upstream” banks like Continental, Isaac set in motion the unraveling of confidence. When Isaac insisted that only insured depositors up to $100,000 would be reimbursed in the Penn Square failure, that sent a scary message to all large-scale depositors. Isaac had wanted to teach “free market” discipline to the financial markets; instead, he simply frightened them. The complaint against Isaac, however, was also a way to evade the Fed’s own culpability—its failure to act when disciplinary action might have made the difference.

In any case, the basic failures of regulation were already history. Now Volcker and the other government agencies faced an immediate crisis of unprecedented dimensions—how to stop what was the largest bank “run” in history, how to rescue Continental Illinois if the “run” couldn’t be stopped. They agreed that the FDIC should prepare to make a huge infusion of capital, as much as $2 billion. If the bank’s condition did not stabilize, they would try to arrange a take-over by another major bank.

None of the regulators, including Isaac, entertained, even briefly, the option they had followed in Penn Square—paying off only the insured depositors, letting Continental fail and close it doors. If this bank failed, the Comptroller projected, that might lead to another hundred bank failures, mostly small banks that had parked their own money at Continental Illinois. About twenty-three hundred banks were among Continental’s large depositors and these assets would be frozen, at least temporarily, if the bank was liquidated. The potential losses to smaller banks were not the real danger, however.

How many of them would fail [Isaac asked aloud]? I don’t know. Could we handle it? Yes. But more important was the situation in the largest banks. First Chicago was going to announce big quarterly losses of its own. First Chicago would not have withstood that announcement if we hadn’t saved Continental. There would have been a run on Manny Hanny [Manufacturers Hanover]. There were all sorts of rumors about Manny Hanny rippling through the market. Bank of America, Interfirst of Dallas had problems too. Financial Corporation of America [the nation’s largest savings and loan] could not have lasted a minute if we had done a deposit payoff at Continental. In my judgment, we would have had worldwide chaos.

This time, whatever the cost, the federal government had to reassure the money managers. If Continental failed, as Governor Charles Partee explained, the corporate treasurers, money managers and local governments that got “burned” there would have a powerful incentive to protect themselves at other banks.

Bank of America was exposed on real estate and other loans, Manny Hanny had a very large exposure on LDC debt [Partee said]. If you were a money manager and there was even the slightest question that you might not be able to get your money out of one of these banks, there was no percentage in maintaining your deposit there. If you had $1 million in Bank of America and you had seen its reports coming out quarter after quarter with these loan losses and then you couldn’t get the money, there’s no question you’d be fired. You might earn a few extra basis points on interest by keeping your funds there, but if you are wrong, you get fired. It’s a very uneven choice.

Over the weekend, Continental’s management tried to work out its own rescue by lining up support from the nation’s other largest banks. A hastily assembled consortium of sixteen banks, led by Morgan Guaranty, agreed to put up a $4.5 billion loan, a private “safety net” for their troubled competitor. The announcement failed to persuade. When the money markets opened on Monday, May 14, Continental’s hemorrhaging resumed.

“The banks tried to get together without government and it didn’t work,” a Treasury official said. “Then they fell on their knees with hands outspread and said, ‘Save us!’”

While Continental borrowed more from the Fed and from its “safety net” of private banks, Volcker, Isaac and Conover worked out the terms for the federal rescue. The three flew to New York on Wednesday to meet with the leading bankers to enlist their support and assistance. The FDIC would guarantee an infusion of at least $1.5 billion and the banks were asked to put up $500 million as an expression of confidence. Present were executives from seven banks—Morgan, Chase, Citibank, Chemical, Manufacturers Hanover, Bankers Trust and Bank of America—who were to sell the package to twenty-five or thirty other major banks. In order not to alarm, the bankers assembled at Morgan Guaranty’s uptown branch, rather than at the New York Fed in Wall Street.

The meeting was faintly reminiscent of Wall Street’s glorious past, the era when J. P. Morgan and partners could meet among themselves and assemble a package of emergency loans to save the banking system. Several bank executives made patriotic speeches during the meeting, alluding to the Morgan tradition and the spirit of noblesse oblige inherited by Wall Street’s most important banks.

The reality was utterly different, however. It was the federal government that would save the banks from possible calamity, including the seven banks assembled at the table. All of them, in varying degrees, were vulnerable to the same sort of panic that had brought down Continental. They all depended heavily on the daily money-market borrowing required by “managed liabilities” banking. They were all overexposed on foreign lending. Even so, Citibank, with characteristic independence, balked at the terms. It demanded ironclad language in the Fed-FDIC agreement to protect itself from loss. The lawyers argued through the night and finally Citibank relented.

On Thursday morning, eight days after the “run” began, the federal regulators announced the largest bailout in the history of banking. The FDIC would pump $4.5 billion in immediate new capital into the bank, assuming liability for the bulk of Continental’s bad loans while it searched for a new owner to take over the institution. The Federal Reserve promised that, in the meantime, it would lend whatever was necessary in short-term funds to keep Continental afloat. In the course of fulfilling that promise, the Fed made emergency loans to Continental Illinois that rose to a breathtaking $8 billion.23

As Volcker explained to troubled senators:

The operation is the most basic function of the Federal Reserve. It was why it was founded, to serve as a lender of last resort in times of liquidity pressures of this sort, so they don’t spread through the rest of the system to innocent parties. . . . That’s what a central bank is all about, to provide

liquidity in those circumstances. We are just carrying out the most classic function of a central bank.24

But the essential and most controversial element of the rescue package was the guarantee to protect everyone, large and small, from any losses. The large depositors could relax. Their money at Continental was safe, effectively insured by the joint announcement from the Federal Reserve and the FDIC. Any liabilities would be assumed by the federal government, that is, by the general public.25

A few angry voices were raised. Representative Fernand St. Germain of Rhode Island, who had succeeded Representative Reuss as chairman of House Banking, scornfully called it “a bailout for the powerful.” The size of the government’s rescue of Continental, St. Germain observed, “dwarfs the combined guarantees and outlays of the federal government in the Lockheed, Chrysler and New York City bailouts.” Yet it was arranged, he said, by unelected bureaucrats, with no public debate.

The day after the federal regulators were providing billions to save Continental Illinois, they closed down the Bledsoe County Bank of Pikeville, Tennessee, and the Planters Trust & Savings Bank of Opelousas, Louisiana. Small independent banks complained about the “double standard” implicit in the Continental deal. During the first half of 1984, forty-three banks failed, most of them small agricultural banks forced to close because so many farmers and small businesses were defaulting on their loans.26 In nearly all cases, the FDIC paid off only the insured depositors and arranged a take-over by a neighboring bank. Large depositors at Continental were treated more generously than large depositors at small banks. Still, Continental’s managers were fired in disgrace and its stockholders did lose most of the value of their equity. Very few small bankers would wish to endure the same fate.

The Continental bailout, nevertheless, posed an awkward precedent that federal regulators could not explain away. If there was any doubt before, Continental starkly established that the largest banks would never be allowed to fail, whatever the cost to the government. Badgered on the question in House hearings, the Comptroller conceded that, yes, the eleven largest multinational banks would not be allowed to fail. As a practical reality, the number of protected banks was undoubtedly much larger than that. Probably the largest fifty or even one hundred banks would always be safe because the ripples from their failures would be regarded as too unsettling to tolerate.

The distinction had important consequences for the money market and where investors would place large deposits. Over time, smaller banks would suffer competitively and the largest banks would benefit. Why should a money manager put a $1 million deposit in a smaller bank, where he might lose it above the $100,000 federal insurance guarantee, when he knew all his money would be safe in one of the largest banks, no matter how reckless the managers might be? The federal guarantees of bank safety had inadvertently created unequal discipline between large and small, another incentive for the consolidation of the banking system. As the smaller banks and savings and loans were allowed to fail, their space was taken by the big ones. Citibank, Chase, Chemical and others acquired dozens of failed institutions around the country, establishing far-flung corporate beachheads while they awaited the day when Congress would allow them to become nationwide banks.

The most striking political fact of the Continental rescue, however, was the absence of controversy. Aside from small bankers, there was almost no reaction from the general public and very little criticism from politicians. The dimensions of the crisis were so awesome and complex that perhaps ordinary people felt they could not question the decisions. Another possibility was that most Americans regarded the government intervention as unexceptional. When the largest, most influential enterprises were imperiled, the government would come to their rescue. That was how people expected the American system to work.

Continental stabilized for a time, thanks to the federal promises of support, but skeptical money managers continued to be wary and the bank’s funding eroded further. Continental Illinois was shrinking. By midsummer, it was the thirteenth largest bank, not seventh. Meanwhile, the federal regulators could find no willing buyers. Chemical, Citibank and First Chicago all took a look at Continental’s books and shared their pessimistic assessments with the government agencies: the bank had $4 billion in bad loans, not $2.7 billion, as the federal regulators had believed. No one offered a good explanation as to why the private bankers found problems that the government regulators did not see. In any case, no one wanted to buy the carcass.

Therefore, in late July, the Continental Illinois bank was nationalized. That term was not used, of course, but that was the meaning of the announcement in Washington. The federal government bought the bank. Unable to find a private buyer, the U.S. government itself became the owner and, until further notice, sole proprietor of the nation’s thirteenth largest bank.

The idea of nationalized industries was, of course, offensive to the free-market ethic that still dominated American politics, yet this was done without controversy—and under Ronald Reagan, the most conservative President to govern in many decades. Conservative commentators were silent as the government executed its massive intrusion in the free marketplace. Possibly conservatives were reassured by the understanding that Washington did not intend to operate Continental Illinois as a public bank, its lending policies guided by larger public purposes. Continental would continue to be run like an ordinary commercial bank, strictly devoted to profit making.

The nationalization of Continental was, in fact, a quintessential act of modern liberalism—the state intervening in behalf of private interests and a broad public purpose. In this supposedly conservative era, federal authorities were setting aside the harsh verdict of market competition (and grossly expanding their own involvement in the private economy) in order to protect private citizens from loss—and thereby save the system. Washington was going into big-time banking.

The rescue of Continental also amounted to a vast bailout for the creditor classes. Perhaps that was why the conservative commentators did not complain. The government would save investors from their losses on a scale many times greater than anything it had ever done for endangered debtors, such as the Chrysler Corporation or Lockheed. In the past, conservative scholars and pundits had objected loudly at any federal intervention in the private economy, particularly emergency assistance for failing companies. Now, they hardly seemed to notice. Perhaps they would have been more vocal if the deed had been done by someone other than the conservative champion, Ronald Reagan.

Under the circumstances, the government did not have good alternatives. The FDIC acquired 160 million shares of Continental’s stock, fired the management and installed new executives. The purchase price amounted to $5.5 billion (not counting the continuing aid from the Federal Reserve). The assumption was that the government would own Continental until it was back on its feet and operating profitably again, then it would sell the bank back to private investors. By early 1986, the FDIC reported a loss to date of $1.24 billion on the bad loans it has assumed from Continental, but it would be many years before anyone knew the full cost to the public. It might also be many years before the federal government could get out of the banking business.

The banking crisis did not end with the rescue of Continental Illinois, however. Fear and nervousness continued to stalk some of the largest banks in the country. The financial markets buzzed with rumors of another impending crisis, perhaps on the same scale. Before the summer was over, the tremors in American banking would have a direct, distorting impact on the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy—and, therefore, damaging consequences for the American economy.

The value of American farmland had fallen $149 billion in three years, by as much as 50 percent in some areas, and the collateral would keep shrinking as long as agricultural prices remained flat or falling. Thousands more debtors across the South and the Midwest would be driven to the wall, in energy and other commodities as well as farming. The rolling liquidation of real assets was continuing. Ultimately, it brought down banks that had financed production of those real assets.27

While the demise of small country banks traumatized local communities and offered a staple feature story for the network television news, the real crisis in banking was at the opposite end of the system —among the largest institutions. While the electorate was distracted by campaign speeches on a host of other themes, federal bank regulators sweated through an anxious summer, tamping out the recurring gossip about who would fail next.

The largest ‘‘farm bank” in the nation, after all, was Bank of America in San Francisco, also the nation’s largest commercial bank. B of A loans financed the vast enterprises of California agribusiness. But the bank had also financed a largely vacant luxury condo tower in Dallas, now foreclosed. It put up the money for the idle offshore drilling rigs owned by Global Marine in Houston, now in trouble too. It provided billions more for other ventures that were now defaulting. Real estate, oil. agriculture, shipping—Bank of America would be forced to swallow $4.1 billion in failed loans during the first half of the 1980s and yet still would have $7 billion on its books in exposure to other troubled debtors, Mexico, Venezuela and Brazil.

There is weakness in the financial structure [Governor Partee said}, but the banks are not weak because they have been foolhardy. Banks have been doing what they've always done, making loans to business and farmers. They are the ones who are weak. There are quite a few companies in financial difficulty, lots of real-estate projects, lots of farmers, including multimillion-dollar agribusiness farms. It's the customers, not the banks.

William Isaac, the FDIC chairman, agreed:

It was very shaky after Continental Illinois. If Continental had not been handled, we would have been in the soup. Crocker of San Francisco was weak, but it had been weak for a long time. First Chicago. Bank of America, Manny Hanny. Interfirst of Dallas. First National of Houston. Financial Corporation of America. Michigan National. Equibank of Pittsburgh. Those are ones that would have been in the soup.

The most striking evidence of the distress was quite visible, though barely noted. Some of the largest and proudest financial institutions were selling off their glamorous headquarters buildings in order to raise capital to offset loan losses. Bank of America, First Chicago, Crocker, Security Pacific, Bank of Boston all sold their modern office towers, then rented them back from the new owners—an appropriate symbol of the forced retreat that was under way.28

The general public may have been oblivious to the peril, but financial markets were not. One week after the Continental Illinois rescue in May, the rumors of funding difficulties turned on Manufacturers Hanover Trust in New York, the nation’s fourth largest bank. Investors dumped Manny Hanny stock, and its value fell 11 percent in one day, despite the bank’s denials. Other major bank shares were driven down too, including even the most prestigious and best-managed ones like Morgan and Citibank. Edward A. Taber, president of the T. Rowe Price money-market fund, explained: “The market is saying, ‘Who’s next?’”29

The New York Fed’s Open Market Desk reported the strains more soberly: “The funding problems of Continental cast a long shadow over the financial markets during the late spring and summer.” Investors, the New York desk observed, generally executed a “flight to quality,” moving money away from any banks perceived as troubled.30

Through the summer, the larger banks had to bid up the interest rates offered on their own CDs in order to maintain their own funding. The interest-rate spread between three-month bank CDs and Treasury bills ballooned, from 35 to 160 basis points. Paying more for their own daily borrowing squeezed the banks’ profits further, adding to the damage already caused by loan losses.

With an element of poetic justice, commercial banks were now suffering a severe aftershock from the very policies they had urged the Federal Reserve to pursue—the stringent tightening of money and rapid deceleration of price inflation that had destroyed or undermined so many other enterprises. Commercial banks had enjoyed record profits back in 1980 and 1981 when the Fed pushed interest rates to unprecedented peaks, but the severity of the Fed’s action had now caught up with them too. The Fed had not given debtors time to adjust to the new reality of disinflation, and because the tables were turned so abruptly on businesses, on farmers, on Latin-American nations, the banks were now stuck with huge portfolios of troubled loans.

Few people made the connection, but, in a sense, this was part of the price still being paid for Volcker’s swift and sure assault on inflation. The long and severe contraction of 1982 became the fragility and failure in the banking system in 1984. A more patient approach would have taken longer, but it also would have done less damage to the structure, with fewer victims still struggling to stay afloat years afterward. The stricken debtors, from independent oil drillers to sovereign nations, were now threatening to drag the lenders down with them.

Commercial banks charged off $12.5 billion in loan losses in 1984, more than double the loan-loss provisions of 1981. Their profit rate fell to the lowest level in twenty years. The return on equity for the largest banks had declined from 13.95 percent in 1980 to 9.78 percent. Prodded by federal regulators, they were compelled to raise new capital to protect against more loan failures in the future.

“Usually at this stage in an economic recovery,” the Federal Reserve reported, “the quality of loan portfolios would be expected to improve, but loan losses at bank holding companies in 1984 continued to mount.” Anthony Solomon of the New York Fed observed: “New York’s major money-center banks are running a ratio of 3 to 4 percent of nonperforming loans to total assets. Normally at this stage of a recovery, given that we’ve had two years of prosperity, it might be as low as 1 to 1.5 percent. That is distressing and shows the fragility.”31

The public’s moral sensibilities about banking’s problems were terribly confused. Citizens who felt a tug of sympathy for a small-town banker forced to close his doors might secretly relish the distress of behemoth money-center banks. Yet, in either case, the banker was caught by the same forces, the same mistakes. There was no substantial distinction between large and small except, if anything, the largest banks were usually more generous and imaginative in financing the untested future.

In fact, the bankers in trouble had made essentially the same mistakes that the borrowers had made—they had lent money for new ventures based on assumptions about the future that did not materialize. Bankers had likewise ridden the inflationary curve upward— and were now in trouble because the Federal Reserve turned the tables in its anti-inflation campaign. Despite their preferred position of financial expertise, the bankers, large and small, proved to be no more prescient than farmers, real-estate developers, oil producers or South American governments had been. And, the bankers were no less culpable.

The federal government seemed especially confused by this point. From time to time, various members of the Reagan Administration attributed the debt problems to excessive ambitions generated by the inflation of the past—farmers who had bought too much land and equipment, oil producers who had borrowed recklessly. The CEA chairman, Murray Weidenbaum, had called them all “speculators,” gambling that prices would continue to rise forever. Yet, for every farmer or freebooting oilman who had overreached and was subsequently crushed by debt, there was a willing banker who also had been too optimistic, who had made the same bet. It was simply not rational to condemn one side of the debt transaction as reckless and sympathize with the other side as an unfortunate victim. Yet that was essentially the government’s posture—it rushed to assist the lenders who had been burned and, simultaneously, left the borrowers to their fate.

This moral confusion between debtors and lenders was especially evident at the Federal Reserve. The Fed worried intensely about helping the banks to overcome their mistakes, yet it dismissed the plight of the failed borrowers as regrettable but unavoidable, even necessary to the process of disinflation. Paul Volcker, for instance, expressed limited sympathy for the bankrupt farmers. Farmers were hurt, yes, but they had put themselves in an unsustainable position. The farmers built up a lot more productive capability than the world is going to buy.

The central bank, in fact, successfully evaded any real public responsibility for what was happening to American farmers and other debtors, much as it had turned aside the complaints from Midwestern farmers destroyed in the Fed’s deflation back in the 1920s. The exhaustive press and television coverage on the plight of the failing farmers almost never mentioned any connection with monetary policy or the Federal Reserve. Martha Seger, a finance professor from Central Michigan University, was appointed by President Reagan to succeed Nancy Teeters in mid-1984 as the only woman on the Board of Governors. Governor Seger, as a new member, was struck by how easily the Fed distanced itself from the farm distress. In a conversation reported by Jude Wanniski, Seger remarked: “I’m amazed at how many people there are around here [at the Fed] who insist that we have nothing to do with the farm problem. Nobody here but us chickens!”32

For the lenders, however, the financial intermediaries who were also in trouble, the Federal Reserve demonstrated great solicitude. Indeed, Volcker and the other governors went to extraordinary lengths to make sure that the rules of bank regulation were not enforced too zealously in 1983 and 1984. The Federal Reserve (and the Treasury as well) instructed federal bank examiners to apply the accounting standards for bank solvency with due compassion for the special circumstances that troubled bankers found themselves in.

There is no doubt if the examiners were left to themselves, they would have applied their rules in the traditional fashion, put their usual standards on nonperforming loans and so forth, that would have caused enormous

problems [a senior officer at the New York Fed explained]. Who knows what would have happened? But the Board of Governors and the Treasury concerned themselves with the details of the accounting rules more closely than ever before. In other times, the board wouldn’t have concerned itself with these purely technical questions, but this time they supervised everything very closely, more closely than I’ve ever seen before. They were making sure the examiners didn’t overdo their job.

Special advice went out to examiners on the handling of agribusiness loan losses and on the rules for declaring the international loans past due. When Argentina fell behind on its interest payments, a special grace was granted. If the loans had been declared past due, some of the largest New York banks would have had to write off huge losses immediately. In general, the examiners were told to be tolerant.

Governor Partee, chairman of the Fed’s subcommittee on bank supervision, insisted:

We didn’t tell the examiners to do anything that would be improper, but we were concerned that they didn’t become too righteous in a way that would make the problems worse. . . .

There’s the question of when you decide that a bank has made a bad loan. It may be to International Harvester or it may be to Mexico. The loan is in the bank’s portfolio; there’s no chance that it will be paid back. What do you do with it? There are always people who say you ought to step up and take your medicine. Others of us say, “No, it’s better if we try to work it out.”

The Fed’s solicitous response to the banks’ difficulties was, of course, consistent with Volcker’s preoccupation with the refinancing of LDC debt. Through 1983 and 1984, Volcker presided like a matchmaker over the new debt packages between the banks and the nations that needed the money, Brazil, Argentina, Mexico and the others, nudging each side toward settlement. If one deal had failed, if one country had defaulted, the whole universe of debt-burdened countries might have given up any attempt to service its loans. At one point, bankers on the Federal Advisory Council complained directly to the governors that Fed bank examiners were being overly zealous toward the banks’ shaky LDC loans. “Concern was expressed,” the bankers’ council reported, “about comments by bank examiners who did not appear to be conversant with the view of the Federal Reserve Board. ...”

Volcker himself confessed: “We’re ah being induced to close our eyes to loose banking practices.”33

But the political climate had changed, and now Congress wanted the Fed and the Treasury to get tough with the banks and impose new regulatory controls. Volcker himself was willing. He had always been skeptical about the deregulation of finance. Still, in the fragile circumstances, the Fed would proceed cautiously.

Gradually, a step at a time, both the Fed and the Comptroller did begin to tighten procedures. They pressed the undercapitalized banks to improve their capital base and meet the higher capital requirements. The largest banks, which had been exempted from the new capital ratios imposed in 1981, were now enjoined to raise more capital and meet the 6 percent minimum. This would, in effect, improve their insurance against future failure if one of the major LDC debtors defaulted.

The Comptroller’s office also began applying the sting of public discipline, the legal weapon that regulators had hesitated to invoke against Continental Illinois before its collapse. In an extraordinary move in the autumn, First Chicago and Bank of America were both publicly chastised and compelled to accept a regulatory order that directed them to tighten their lending policies, build up their capital reserves and make provisions to protect themselves against the kind of short-term liquidity crisis that had brought down Continental.

Bankers grumbled at the new heavy-handedness from federal regulators, but the financial markets were hardly panicked by the news. Investors were already quite familiar with the big problems facing these banks, and, if anything, investors may have been reassured to see the federal regulators at last forcing troubled banks to take remedial action.

But the summer’s silent crisis in banking was about to have a far more profound impact on the American economy. The jittery behavior of the major banks was disrupting the Federal Reserve’s own calculations about the money supply, and the confusion led the central bank into another serious error. The braking effects of the Fed’s March tightening would be inadvertently compounded—and the American economy driven to the edge of recession.

Who’s next? The managers of the nation’s leading banks were surrounded by dark rumors and nervous investors, poised to withdraw billions at the least hint of difficulty. A second tremor jarred their nerves when Financial Corporation of America, the largest savings and loan in the nation, was caught in a funding crisis too. The Los Angeles thrift swiftly lost $8 billion in deposits and federal regulators had to prop it up with huge emergency loans.34

Under these circumstances, any bank that was seen borrowing heavily and often from the Fed might become the next candidate for failure in the market gossip. Overnight, it might be swept away by panicky investors, just as Continental had been. A Pittsburgh bank economist put it plainly: “We didn’t want to borrow at the Discount window because of Continental Illinois. If people saw us borrowing a lot, they would think we were in the same place.”

Across the country, nervous bank managers adopted the same strategy—they discreetly hoarded larger pools of excess reserves, just in case, and they grossly curtailed their routine borrowings from the Fed. For weeks, the level of Discount borrowing by commercial banks remained mysteriously low—half or less of what the Federal Reserve anticipated.

The normal hydraulics of money management were thrown off by this and the effect was perversely damaging. “The banks were not borrowing as we expected them to do,” Volcker explained. “Therefore, the market was tighter than we anticipated.” Charles Partee put it more bluntly. “When the banks stopped borrowing,” Partee said, “we ended up being tighter than we intended.”

None of this was instantly clear, however, to the governors or the Fed’s operators. Normally, Federal Reserve technicians relied on the daily level of Discount borrowing as a major indicator of credit conditions. Discount lending normally went up when money was tight; it subsided when the money supply was ample and easy. By mid-June, the normal signals became utterly confused. The Discount borrowing by banks was subsiding, a signal of excess supply. But the market interest rates were rising, a sign that conditions were tightening. Which was it—easy or tight? Should the Fed be withdrawing reserves or adding more? It couldn’t tell for sure.

The confusion misled the Fed’s own management because normally the Open Market Desk assumed that a portion of the new reserves it provided to the banking system would flow through the Discount window, the rest through open-market transactions. The two valves were routinely coordinated with each other. But, if one valve got stuck, the other valve would have to be opened wider—or else the economy would be starved for money.

That is what happened by midsummer. The Federal Reserve was slow to recognize that it was the nervous bank managers, not changing economic conditions, that explained the anomaly. Rather than provide more money through open-market transactions to make up for the shortfall at the Discount window, the Federal Reserve allowed the money supply to get tighter and tighter.

The Federal Funds rate, which the Fed itself had pushed up in March, rose again in June and July by another 100 to 150 basis points. Other short-term interest rates moved up accordingly. The ultimate effect on the real economy—though unintended—was to step still harder on the brake.

When the Federal Open Market Committee met in July, the majority rejected the technicians’ interpretation of what was happening and, instead, concluded that the rising interest rates reflected real economic momentum. The economy, they agreed, was slowing down from the booming pace of last winter, but it was still moving along at a “relatively sizable rate of expansion.”

Once again, Preston Martin was a minority of one, arguing that the fragile conditions in finance were too grave to let interest rates rise further. Once again, he cited the precarious state of his old industry, the savings and loans. “We just threw them to the wolves,” Martin complained. “I argued the situation is too vulnerable. We have to be accommodative because of the vulnerability of key sectors of the economy and of financial markets to the high interest rates.”

And, once again, Martin did not persuade. The outcome was further deterioration for the economy. It did not continue to expand smartly, as the FOMC predicted; it slowed down abruptly, almost to a halt. The Fed’s management error was reflected in what happened to the money supply. In June, M-l had grown by nearly 11 percent. In July, M-l contracted—shrinking by 1 percent.

For the Reagan boom, the inadvertent midsummer tightening was like a final thump—knocking the last wind out of it. Real interest rates were the clearest measure of what the Fed had done to squelch the roaring recovery. In the spring and ^summer of 1984, the real interest rate on long-term government bonds rose to an extraordinary 9.6 percent—the highest cost of money, in real terms, since Paul Volcker had become chairman in 1979. Real rates were nearly double the punishing conditions the Fed had imposed back in 1982 when it was managing the economic contraction. They were roughly four times higher than the normal cost of money during an expansionary cycle. Worse still, rising real interest rates, inevitably, drove the dollar still higher in foreign exchange, compounding the damage to American producers.

By the fall quarter, the economy was limp, growing at a lackluster rate of 2.1 percent and still weakening. In August, the unemployment rate crept back up to 7.5 percent. Ronald Reagan’s boom was over.

“We were a little bit slow to ease,” Paul Volcker conceded. “I thought at the time we were a bit late.”

Volcker concluded that the Fed must reverse course—and quickly —but the Federal Reserve chairman could not convince his colleagues. When they met on August 21, for once, he did not get his way within the Federal Open Market Committee. Throughout his tenure, there were only a few occasions when Volcker’s perspective on monetary policy did not prevail inside the policy-making committee, at least in a compromised form. The August meeting of the FOMC was one of those occasions, perhaps the starkest one.

Volcker was fairly certain about the outlook, but most of the committee members were insisting that the Fed couldn’t ease. “The economy’s going to come roaring back,” they told him.

Arrayed against the chairman in the debate were the senior System men—Gramley, Wallich, Partee—making much the same argument they had made through the year. The Fed had always lost control at this point in earlier cycles. If it did not hold firm now, price inflation would escalate six or nine months hence and the central bank would, once again, have to play a painful game of catch-up. The Fed’s primary objective was to maintain stable prices, and it should concentrate on that single goal, not on the competing objective of stimulating the economy.

“Gramley won the argument,” an FOMC officer said. “Gramley always expressed concern that if they didn’t stay tight now, the next time would be too late with the way the trends are breaking.”

Volcker invoked the technical reasons to explain why money was too tight, tighter than they intended. Nervous bankers were staying away from the Discount window and throwing off the normal calculations. The majority did not buy it.

“The committee was reluctant to accept the notion that something exceptional was going on,” Governor Partee said. “We were concerned about being too easy.”

The sharp division within the Federal Open Market Committee was not revealed by the final vote or by the FOMC’s minutes. The chairman himself did not normally dissent, even when he did not get his way. That would suggest internal turmoil at the central bank, not to mention personal embarrassment for its leader. Volcker yielded to the others, and as the FOMC minutes opaquely reported, “All but one member indicated their acceptance of a directive specifying no change at this time in the degree of pressure on reserve positions.” The dissenter was Henry Wallich, who as usual wanted the Fed to tighten still more.

Paul Volcker lost. Yet he still got his way. The Federal Reserve chairman went ahead on his own and eased anyway, despite the Federal Open Market Committee’s instructions to hold firm. Volcker had only one vote within the FOMC, but he ran the Federal Reserve. In particular, he supervised the daily operations of the Open Market Desk in New York. After the August meeting, Volcker made his own liberal interpretation of the FOMC’s directive and told the Open Market Desk to ease.

“I knew what instructions he was giving the New York desk,” Anthony Solomon, president of the New York Fed, said, “and I thought he was not faithfully observing the instructions of the FOMC. He got the desk to take major action that went way beyond the framework of the directive. He was taking too much leeway personally.”

Volcker shrugged off the “bitching” from other committee members. He had a secondary motive for ignoring the FOMC decision and moving quickly—the approaching fall election. The closer it came to election day, the harder it would be for the Federal Reserve to execute a major policy turn without being accused of politics by one side or the other.

“Volcker thought it was necessary to ease for economic reasons,” an FOMC official explained, “but if he waited until after the election, that might be too late. In effect, the window was closing. From Labor Day till election day, the window is closed. He wanted to ease and that was about the last point he could do it without making it look too political.”

Some of the FOMC members were not amused. When they saw interest rates declining, they called Tony Solomon at the New York Fed for an explanation. “They called me, they called the desk, asking, ‘What’s going on?’” Solomon said. “The desk was easing way beyond the directive. The desk was easing because Volcker was telling it to. I told him: ‘The substance of what you did is all right, but you should have called a conference call with the committee before you did it. The morale of the FOMC gets shaky.’”

Despite the grumbling from his colleagues, Volcker was right about the economy. It needed help from the Fed—lots of help. The chairman’s unilateral decision to relax money policy pulled short-term interest rates down as the Federal Funds rate gradually declined by about 100 basis points. That was not enough, however. The Federal Reserve would have to ease much more than that to keep the recovery alive.

Rather abruptly, the Federal Reserve was compelled to shift its attention from the brake to the accelerator. For many months, the central bank had been worried about slowing down an economic recovery it considered too bullish. Now the Fed was preoccupied with restarting an economy that suddenly seemed dangerously weak.

The enduring image evoked by Ronald Reagan’s campaign for reelection was of America in soft focus. His most compelling television commercial conveyed a romanticized vision of everyday life, scenes of ordinary people up and doing, heading for work, raising the flag. “It’s morning again in America,” the moderator announced in a wise, gentle voice. The camera toured a comfortable community, glimpsing prosperity and good feeling everywhere it turned, a family wedding, a new home with a white picket fence. “Just about everyone in town is thinking the same thing—now that our country is turning around, why would we ever turn back again?”

Before campaign rallies, the President announced the dawning of a new era. “America is back,” he said in Ohio, “a giant re-emergent on the scene. Our country is powerful in its renewed spirits, powerful in its economy, powerful in the world economy, and powerful in its ability to defend itself and secure the peace.”35

For a California audience, the President offered a new slogan for his second term: “You ain’t seen nothing yet.”

Everywhere he traveled, the crowds waved flags and broke into a spontaneous chant, “U.S.A.—U.S.A.—U.S.A.” The nation triumphant. The President invoked the spirit of the Olympic torch that had been carried hand to hand across the country to the Olympic games in Los Angeles, where American athletes won many gold medals amid the patriotic pageantry. “U.S.A.—U.S.A.—U.S.A.,” the crowds chanted in joyous self-congratulation.

Thus, with words and pictures, the President fused nationalism and capitalism, the two anchoring ideas of American culture and politics —patriotism and prosperity joined in a single celebration. Ronald Reagan, given his performing skills and sunny personality, evoked the familiar symbols with a melodramatic enthusiasm unmatched in modern politics. The fusion was not, however, new to American politics. The energy of nationhood had always been employed to support the prerogatives of capitalist enterprise.

Sixty years earlier, Thorstein Veblen had written: “. . . the illusions of nationalism allowed the underlying population to believe that the common good was bound up with the business advantage of these captains of solvency into whose service the national establishment was gradually drawn. ...” And Veblen wrote: “Uncritical devotion to the national pretensions being a meritorious habit, it is also a useful article of camouflage, a shelter for gainful enterprises and transactions which might otherwise be open to doubt, a means of avoiding unfavorable notice and of procuring a profitable line of goodwill.”36

The patriotic celebration in the fall of 1984, wonderfully effective as a device to re-elect Ronald Reagan, also served as an “article of camouflage.” The flag was like a veil that concealed large ironies, great illusions. At the very moment when the Reagan campaign was proclaiming “morning again in America,” a dusky pallor was settling over business activity. It was not dawn, but closer to twilight for Ronald Reagan’s booming economy.

When the President promised, “You ain’t seen nothing yet,” the slogan had a droll double meaning. The public, it was true, did not see. Voters believed, reasonably enough from what they had experienced, that the country was headed onward and upward. They did not realize that the roaring phase of expansion had already ended, that the economy was settling into a bumpy routine of fitful starts and stagnation, an era of below-average growth and above-average unemployment.

The news media amplified the illusions. While the business section dutifully reported the slowdown in economic activity, the political coverage on the front page blared a louder message, supporting the President’s claims. Americans did not know—and the news media did not tell them—that the rising tide of prosperity was more in the nature of a false, brief surge.37

The spirit of nationalism, the warming glow of patriotic fervor that swept the country, was especially ironic. The resurgent American economy was, indeed, leading the global economy back from the worldwide recession. But the U.S. government’s economic policies were anything but nationalistic. Domestic industries—manufacturing, agriculture, oil and other minerals—were being decimated by the combined effects of Washington’s fiscal and monetary policy. Ronald Reagan’s symbol of American revival, the strong dollar, was in reality assisting America’s foreign competitors, ceding a larger and larger share of world trade to other nations.

The President’s campaign themes could not have been effective, however, if they had not seemed consistent with the authentic human experience of American voters. What most ordinary citizens knew from their own lives appeared to match what the President told them was true. The anxiety of price inflation was gone. Most people were back at work. Most important of all, in immediate political terms, real disposable income per capita was rising throughout the campaign year at an extraordinary pace—up 5 percent. In 1980, when Jimmy Carter was up for re-election, price inflation was above 13 percent and real disposable income was shrinking slightly, thanks to the brief recession. When President Reagan asked, “Are you better off than you were four years ago?,” the answer seemed self-evident for the majority of Americans.

The improved economic conditions were summarized in the “misery index,” a playful invention of economist Arthur Okun, which politicians of both parties had borrowed for presidential campaigns. The misery index simply added the unemployment rate with the inflation rate as a rough measure of economic discomfort. In 1980, it was more than 19 percent. By 1984, the misery index was down to 11 percent.

Still, a telling dimension of economic distress was missing from that comparison—the historically high level of real interest rates. Democrats, if they had wished to focus on the issue, might have invoked the “hardship index,” devised by David P. Eastburn, former president of the Philadelphia Fed. To incorporate the cost of credit as an important element of economic pain, the hardship index simply added the real interest rate on home mortgages to the inflation and unemployment rates. That combination provided a better snapshot of the economic reality facing average citizens. On Eastburn’s hardship index, 1980 and 1984 looked identical. In both years, the index was stuck at the uncomfortably high level of 21.38

The regressive wealth distribution that flowed from the high interest rates did not easily translate into a political issue. The population, it was true, was starkly divided into net financial debtors and creditors —the 55 percent who were borrowers and the 45 percent who were creditors. The benefits of the high cost of money were flowing to the minority and especially to the wealthy 10 percent who owned most of the net financial wealth. Since this was never talked about in politics, not many voters understood it.

Yet, even if there had been general awareness, it was not certain what the political impact would be. Given the decayed condition of electoral democracy, barely more than half of adult Americans voted in presidential elections. The electorate that actually voted was top-heavy with better-educated, more prosperous Americans—the same people who, on the whole, benefited from the government’s high interest rates. Conceivably, a majority of the voting Americans actually liked the high rates. The debtors, though a majority of citizens, counted for less at election time. This helped explain why politicians, particularly Democrats who presumed to speak for the less fortunate, almost never addressed the class implications of debt and interest rates. In speaking for the debtors, many of whom never voted, a candidate risked offending the creditors, who did.

Most citizens, in any case, and most politicians did not assess the condition of economic well-being in these terms. They looked at the present and the recent past, not at implications for the distant future. In 1984, the immediate evidence of rising incomes was a far more convincing reality than the long-term consequences of borrowing money at punishing interest rates. Walter Mondale’s campaign for the Presidency could not successfully refute what most citizens believed to be true. America was back, just as the President said.

“For the Reagan Administration,” budget director David Stockman mused, “it was pure luck that the recovery peaked in perfect timing for the election. Then it slowed down and it’s been running below trend ever since.”

Anthony Solomon expressed the same reaction: “These guys have been incredibly lucky because the Federal Reserve squeezed out the inflationary pressures and the timing happened to be perfect—coming into an election year with a strongly recovering economy and low inflation.”

As the economy slowed down sharply in the early fall, the Reagan White House became nervous again about the Federal Reserve, but the political managers agreed that it would be pointless and perhaps counterproductive to revive “Fed bashing” in the midst of a campaign that was going their way. Whatever the Fed did in August or September was not going to substantially alter the economy before November.

“The White House was upset,” Stockman said, “but the second-quarter numbers for economic growth had been awfully good. The White House had enough sense to know that nothing the Fed could do now would affect the election.”

The Republican Party, gathered in convention in Dallas to nominate Ronald Reagan, did take a swipe at the central bank, however. Despite White House misgivings, the Republican platform included a section inspired by Representative Jack Kemp, which called for reform of the Federal Reserve and a return to the gold standard.

The Federal Reserve Board’s destabilizing actions must . . . stop [the platform declared]. We need coordination between fiscal and monetary policy, timely information about Fed decisions and an end to the uncertainties people face in obtaining money and credit. The Gold Standard may be a useful mechanism for realizing the Federal Reserve’s determination to adopt monetary policies needed to sustain price stability.39

Like other large controversies surrounding money, the press ignored this one. In 1984, a major political party, the party that held the White House, had proposed a return to the gold standard. Yet the news media paid little attention. Most reporters regarded Kemp’s gold crusade as an oddity, arcane and boring. Money seemed too complicated to understand or to explain.

If the Reagan White House was politically lucky about the economy, so in its own way was the Federal Reserve. Because the Fed had switched directions, because prices were clearly under control and the economy was weak, the fall campaign did not produce the same tension that the Fed had weathered in 1980. While Jimmy Carter was making a desperate effort to hold on to the White House, the Fed twice raised the Discount rate and pushed short-term interest rates higher. In the fall of 1984, the Fed was easing interest rates.

On October 2, the Federal Open Market Committee agreed with what Volcker had argued in August. It must relax money and credit, allowing interest to decline further. The move was too tentative for three committee members. Preston Martin dissented, joined by Emmett Rice and Martha Seger, who was the second Reagan appointee. All wanted stronger action to stimulate the economy.

Frederick Schultz, the former vice chairman, visited his old friends at the Fed on the morning of October 19 and ran into Lyle Gramley and Chuck Partee. “Both of them said the same thing to me—‘Boy, are we lucky,’” Schultz reported. “Because the Fed didn’t have to raise interest rates in the heat of the campaign.”

On the morning of October 25, the money-market analyst at Merrill Lynch delivered his daily report on interest rates, which was broadcast to brokers at all the firm’s far-flung offices. Short-term interest rates, he predicted, would continue to fall rapidly. “They should call it the Federal Open Market Committee to Re-elect Reagan,” he joked.

The President, at that point, did not need any help from the Fed. Reagan carried forty-nine states, the greatest victory in terms of electoral votes since Franklin Roosevelt’s landslide in 1936. “You ain’t seen nothing yet,” the President promised again.

By election day, the Federal Funds rate was trading around 9.7 percent—down by two full percentage points since August. The Federal Reserve Board discreetly waited until two weeks after the election to reduce the Discount rate. Then it reduced the Discount rate again on December 21.

Despite dissents from Lyle Gramley, the Federal Open Market Committee scurried to revive the weakened economy. The FOMC agreed to ease interest rates further at both its November and December meetings. By the end of the year, the Federal Funds rate was below 8 percent for the first time in nearly six years.

The Fed was a bit late. By the final three months of 1984, the booming recovery had been nearly extinguished. Real economic growth for the last quarter fell to an anemic .6 percent—virtually stagnant and dangerously close to contraction. The full scope of what the Federal Reserve had accomplished with its determination to restrain the recovery was now visible in the quarterly growth numbers for the year. First quarter: 11.4 percent real growth. Second quarter:

5.1 percent. Third quarter: 2.1 percent. Fourth quarter: .6 percent.

The recovery had been driven into the ground. Conceivably, as some might claim, the Federal Reserve was not to blame. An economic recovery always slowed down after an initial boom of eighteen to twenty-four months and, therefore, the abrupt subsidence in 1984 might be attributed to “natural forces” of the business cycle. No one, of course, could prove definitively that this was wrong. No one would ever know what might have happened to the U.S. economy if the Fed had not braked it—anymore than one could establish precisely how much economic growth was lost to the nation, jobs and output and income that were permanently forfeited, because the Fed did decide to brake the boom.





But defensive disclaimers after the fact begged the crucial question of intent: Did the Federal Reserve really expect to see the economy subside to nearly zero growth? Is that what the FOMC members had in mind for when they made their policy decisions? Obviously not, judging from the record of their deliberations and their own comments. On the contrary, through most of 1984, the Fed policy makers regularly predicted the opposite danger—an economy running out of control and threatening to create upward pressures on prices again.

If the Federal Reserve believed the recovery would be fading naturally, then why did it raise interest rates and twice apply the brakes? The answer, of course, was that the majority did not believe this. Whatever “natural forces” were moderating the pace of recovery, the Fed did not trust nature to do the job. So it added pressure of its own. The dominant opinion among the FOMC members repeatedly warned about what would happen if the Fed did not act. The majority brushed aside Preston Martin’s pleas and even overrode Paul Volcker’s in order to stand its ground and prove that, this time, the Federal Reserve would not yield.

In addition to the potential growth lost in 1984, the Fed’s strategy may have left larger consequences for the economy. Once the boom was broken, the economy never regained a normal vigor. After the second quarter of 1984, the path of expansion remained below the historic trend line for economic growth, even below the growth rate during the decade of the 1970s, which was universally considered disappointing. The economy did not go into recession; it sputtered and started and disappointed normal expectations.

“It was really scary,” Preston Martin said. “We got a stop-go expansion that we are still living with. You have a quarter of 1 percent growth, then a quarter of 3.5 percent, then 2.5 percent, then another quarter of 1 percent. All through that bouncing around, your unemployment stays too high and interest rates stay too high and your real growth is too low.”

Yet, in its own terms, the Federal Reserve was triumphant. The central bank had won the “game of chicken.” Or, at least, it had not lost. Paul Volcker was utterly unsuccessful in his efforts to persuade Congress to back off and reduce the federal deficits. Despite minor corrective actions, the budget deficits remained huge and would actually reach a new peak in the 1985 fiscal year and a higher one in 1986. Nevertheless, under extreme circumstances, the Fed had not given in. It successfully resisted all the pressures for an easier money policy, including threats and complaints from the White House. Whatever else it got wrong, the Federal Reserve did not repeat its mistakes from the last war.

Prices were steady; money was stable. The central bank and its chairman, after all, had one standard for judging their performance and by that standard they had succeeded. Inflation remained subdued, despite the huge deficits. An economy driven by an enormously stimulative fiscal policy had been kept in check by a steadfast monetary policy. The economy was held back, well short of its potential, but also safe from inflation.

The money question was, as always, a question of values. It depended entirely on what mattered most to the society. If stable money was the nation’s first and most important goal, if avoiding the risk of price inflation came before everything else, then Paul Volcker and the Federal Reserve had accomplished the society’s highest purpose. But, if only money mattered, then all else must count for less. Jobs, production, home ownership, industrial development, an equitable distribution of incomes and wealth—all of society’s competing economic objectives would suffer the consequences of placing money first, as indeed they did. When all these collateral costs were added up, the Federal Reserve’s single-minded triumph proved to be quite expensive.

“I’m a lifelong Republican,” said Robert O. Anderson, chairman of the Atlantic Richfield oil company, “but I fault the Republicans. Here’s a group of free-market, free-enterprise conservatives and they’ve done more to dismantle American industry than any other group in history. And yet they go around saying everything is great. It’s like the Wizard of Oz.”

Anderson was also a former board chairman at the Dallas Federal Reserve Bank and he also faulted the Federal Reserve. “I’m a friend of the Fed’s,” he said, “but I really have been alarmed by what it has done. I told them two years ago that if we didn’t alter our course, we were going to kill our industrial sector and that’s what happened. In my opinion, the Fed compensated so thoroughly for the tax cuts that nobody even noticed the impact.”

To no avail, Anderson personally complained to former colleagues in the System. “When I complain, they simply are silent,” he said. “The Fed doesn’t respond. It just goes its own way. And the White House has been content just to shut up and let the Fed take the heat.”

Anderson was among the industrialists who, for several years, vainly tried to persuade both the Reagan Administration and the Federal Reserve that they must stop the dollar from rising higher and higher in international exchange. For Anderson, the soaring value of the dollar was no mystery. It was mainly driven upward by the high interest rates. “I do not think the high interest rates are any coincidence,” Anderson added. “I think they are part of the overall anti-inflation mode.”

In the fall of 1984, three weeks before the election, the oilmen and business executives of the Houston Club in Houston, Texas, were startled to hear Anderson deliver an impassioned denunciation of what the Reagan-Volcker government was doing to the American economy.

Everytime I travel abroad, people want to know about this enormous recovery the United States is going through—and I have a little trouble telling them about it [the oil executive said]. Because, to me, it is a white-collar recovery. This recovery has left blue-collar America behind. You don’t see the roughnecks out there, you don’t see the carpenters, you don’t see the steelworkers, you don’t see the lumberjacks, you don’t see the farmers. The broad spectrum we used to call “Working America” is not in this recovery.

We have been advised by the computer located in the basement of the Federal Reserve building in Washington, D.C., that we are now exceeding the legal speed limit for economic recovery. And that we must somehow slow this vehicle down. But the Blue-Collar America, Working America, Industrial America is not on this boat. We have, in my opinion, a probable growth rate in services, imports, high tech in the 10 percent range. If your desired level is 4.5 percent, you don’t have to be very smart to figure out that the other half has to travel at minus 2 percent. And that’s just where Industrial America is traveling—minus 2.40

Anderson’s lament—repeated less vividly by many others in industry and agriculture—was largely ignored during 1984, when the worst of the damage was done. When the Federal Reserve stiffened interest rates to brake the recovery, the dollar escalated in value by another 12 percent against foreign currencies. The index of the dollar’s average exchange value with the other major industrial currencies was below 100 at the end of 1980. By the end of 1983, it had risen to 133. By the end of 1984, it was at 149. Neither the Fed nor the Treasury tried to stop it.

Over four years, the cumulative appreciation of the dollar was more than 50 percent—a rough measure of the price disadvantage that the U.S. government had imposed on all the trade-sensitive sectors in the American economy. It was no mystery why American companies were closing domestic factories and moving production abroad or why farmers in Kansas could no longer sell their surplus wheat overseas.

Caterpillar Tractor moved its forklift production from Mentor, Ohio, to Leicester, England. Ford closed a plant in Romeo, Michigan, and shifted the jobs to Belgium and Britain. Du Pont cut more jobs in the United States and built new chemical works in West Germany, France and the Netherlands. Goodyear Tire & Rubber gave up trying to sell huge earthmover tires from Ohio and began making them in Japan.41

The flight of U.S. production had ironic consequences for supply-side economics. New plants and factories were indeed being built in America, but they were offset by those that were closed. Economist Gerald Epstein described the actual bottom line: “As a percentage of GNP, net investment was lower in 1984 than in 1979—lower, indeed, than it has been in any recent business-cycle peak . . . industries that are being adversely affected by the high dollar, such as paper, steel and nonelectrical machinery, are cutting back on investment in new plants and equipment.”42

For agriculture, export markets continued to shrink. Within two years, the trend produced a startling symbol of reversal in America’s role as producer of food and fiber. By 1986, it was clear the United States, the most abundant farm country in the world, would become a net importer of agricultural products.

Some cynical farmers and farm-state politicians concluded that the Fed was doing this to them on purpose—in order to bail out the money-center banks burdened by bad foreign loans. The strong dollar helped Latin nations to suppress imports of American food products and, meanwhile, to expand their own exports to the United States— giving them the trade surpluses needed to keep up with their loan payments. Farmers in the Midwest lost in the transaction, while bankers in New York benefited.

Whether or not the farmers were correct in their suspicions about the Fed’s motivations, they were certainly right about the results. The farmers might have been shocked to learn that the bankers themselves cited the trade-off in their private advice to the Federal Reserve Board —only the bankers saw it as one of the benefits of the strong dollar. The dollar-induced trade imbalances were hurting agriculture and other sectors, the Federal Advisory Council noted, but they also “provide the LDCs with some much-needed foreign exchange to service debt.”

With eloquent anger, Lee Iacocca of Chrysler summarized the overall losses from the strong dollar. Addressing a Washington audience, Iacocca warned:

People in this town better start realizing that buried somewhere in those numbers, between the highs and lows of these [dollar] swings, are things like 140,000 bankruptcies, three million jobs going overseas and 100,000 fewer farmers, most of whom lost their land. These aren’t just bell curves from a textbook. These are real people—human beings trying to eat and buy shoes for their kids and pay off the mortgage.43

The soaring dollar’s destruction to the domestic economy was a tender subject for Federal Reserve officials. They were notably defensive. Judging from the policy record, the Fed’s officials had never fully anticipated how much the dollar would rise as they tightened credit to restrain the recovery. They regretted the consequences. And they offered excuses absolving themselves.

“Our export industries are being wiped out,” Anthony Solomon lamented. “Some of them will never come back from this.” Solomon emphasized that he and Volcker had always been concerned about the dollar, but he insisted they were unable to act. The Fed could not intervene in foreign-exchange markets to tamp down the rising dollar because the Reagan Administration was ideologically opposed to currency interventions. Even occasional foreign-exchange interventions would not have broken the trend, however, as long as U.S. interest rates were so high.

Paul Volcker, likewise, regretted the consequences but pleaded innocent. “The dollar was a big mistake of the fiscal-monetary policy mix,” the chairman acknowledged. “It wasn’t our fault but we couldn’t do anything about it either. I kept worrying about the dollar coming down with a thud, but by late summer of 1984 it became apparent that this was taking starch out of manufacturing.”

Volcker, like Solomon, claimed the Fed was helpless. The central bank could have relaxed domestic interest rates, of course, and that would have brought down the value of the dollar on foreign-exchange markets. But lowering interest rates would have meant surrendering on its main objective—restraining the economy and dampening prices. Volcker said defensively: 1

“Somewhere else,” in the Fed’s perspective, was fiscal policy. The central bank justified its own performance—passively tolerating the dollar’s gross swing in value—by insisting it could do nothing else in the face of the federal deficits. Paul Volcker, it seemed, was as adept as Ronald Reagan at deflecting blame. Just as the President liked to blame every ill consequence on Jimmy Carter and the sins of the past, Volcker blamed fiscal policy and the budget deficits. When faced with public criticism, the central bank often emphasized its impotence.

Look, all we can do is deal with the macro situation [Governor Partee pleaded]. With the situation we had, manufacturing is hit and foreign imports are high, not because of anything we did, but because of the dollar. What else could we do? The dollar is high because of the deficits, because interest rates are higher in the U.S., because of faith in Reagan and the American economy. What were we supposed to do? Are we supposed to just let money grow and grow to keep interest rates falling? That would guarantee inflation.

The Federal Reserve’s self-defense was, to put it charitably, strained. It suggested that the Fed had no discretion in the matter, that there was no other course for monetary policy except the one the Fed had chosen. But that left aside the controversial choices—and mistakes—that the Federal Reserve had made for itself, the extraordinary strategy of high interest rates it followed during recovery and, in particular, the decision to brake the boom in 1984.

Neither of those choices was inevitable, and the excessive nature of what the Fed did was suggested by three different measures. First, real interest rates actually rose to their highest levels as the economy was losing steam—clear evidence that the central bank was overdoing its restraint. Second, economic growth did not simply moderate in 1984, it nearly came to a halt. Third, the general price average did not remain at the moderate level established by the great contraction of 1981-1982, but began falling further—tightening the squeeze on debtors and producers. If it had chosen, the Federal Reserve could have stopped well short of these extremes without yielding to runaway inflation. If the Fed had chosen to be more moderate on interest rates, the devastation from the rising dollar would have been less drastic too.

The Federal Reserve did, however, succeed in evading the blame. Given the divided structure of responsibility in the federal government, everyone could evade blame. Congress and the President left the management of money to the central bank. The central bank pointed the finger back at Congress and the President. The Reagan Administration ignored the rising dollar, even cheered it. The Federal Reserve knew better, but decided it was helpless.

The ambiguity posed the sort of fine-grain question that policy analysts in Washington enjoyed studying. What was the economic cause of the dollar’s drastic appreciation? What or who was to blame for the unfortunate devastation—monetary policy or fiscal policy, the Federal Reserve or the executive branch and Congress? Their conclusions were invariably carefully hedged assessments of cause and effect. For the millions of citizens and business enterprises that suffered the consequences, a simpler answer was sufficient: the U.S. government was to blame, all of it.

For most American families, there were two major purchases in life —the car and the house—and no other transactions were as important to their sense of well-being. Yet, something strange was happening in the Reagan recovery: Americans were not buying as many houses and cars as they used to buy. Amid the general euphoria over the revived prosperity, this was like a well-kept secret. The newsmagazines and other media focused, instead, on chronicling the emergence of the Yuppies, a new class of young urban professionals with high incomes and luxurious tastes. As a representative group, the Yuppies could not have been more distant from what was really happening to the patterns of American consumption.

The mass market was shrinking. Automobile sales were booming, of course, in 1984—up 50 percent from Detroit’s low point in the recession. Yet the auto industry, including the rising sales volume captured by foreign imports, never recovered the same market that it had enjoyed in the 1970s. As a percentage of the driving-age population, the sale of autos and trucks was actually 16 percent below 1978 and 22 percent below 1973, Morgan Guaranty reported. Compared to the historic consumption patterns, Detroit and Japan and Europe were competing for shares in a smaller market.44

The 1980s should have meant, if anything, record car sales. For one thing, the working-age population now included that swollen generation of young people from the “baby boom,” new consumers with their own incomes, forming their own households. Furthermore, gasoline prices were declining steadily in the eighties, instead of the steep price increases of the seventies that had raised the cost of owning a car and discouraged buyers. The potential was there, but unfulfilled.

The retreat from home buying was more striking and also more fundamental to the American standard of living. The housing industry surged and ebbed month to month during the recovery, usually following changes in interest rates, but home builders never came close to reaching the potential market of new home buyers in the 1980s. The lost customers in housing naturally extended to durable goods like refrigerators and washing machines that new homeowners would purchase.

Housing starts reached a robust total of 1.7 million units in 1984, nearly double the lowest point of the recession. Yet, during the 1970s, when the pool of potential buyers was much smaller, the housing industry had surpassed 2 million starts a year four times and set a record of 2.4 million new homes in 1972. The decade of the eighties should have broken that record, since the “baby boom” was adding an extra 12 million young families to the pool of potential first-time home buyers. Where did all these buyers go?

“During the 1980s, we have the largest number of new people added to the age group that typically buys homes,” said Michael Sumichrast, chief economist for the home builders’ association. “The problem is a lot of these young people cannot afford to buy houses. They have no choice but to rent or to double up.”45

These were the people priced out of the housing market by the high mortgage interest rates or by personal incomes that were too depressed to support a mortgage or by both. Millions of younger families found they could not afford what their parents or even their older brothers and sisters had been able to enjoy prior to the 1980s. If homeownership was the essential element of the “American dream,” the dream was becoming more selective.

For the first time in forty years, the percentage of American families that owned their own homes actually decreased during the Reagan Presidency. Though no one talked about it much in the political campaigns, this was a most significant turning point for the pattern of American life. Rising levels of homeownership had been a given since 1940. Stimulated by federal subsidies of various sorts, including the government-imposed ceilings on interest rates, the rate of homeownership among Americans had increased steadily from 44 percent in 1940 to 66 percent by 1980. Starting in 1981, homeownership began to decline for the first time since World War II. By 1984, it was down to 64.5 percent. By 1986, it would fall to 63.9 percent.

“Although the annual declines have been small, they cumulatively offset all of the gains in homeownership achieved during the boom years of the mid-to-late 1970s,” the MIT-Harvard Joint Center for Housing Studies reported. In other words, if homeownership was a shared measure of national progress, then the nation had regressed to the pre-1973 level during the era of Reagan and Volcker.46

Virtually all of the lost ground was suffered by young people, families under thirty-five years old. Except perhaps for Yuppies, the young families that could buy got smaller homes for their money and were compelled to pay much larger shares of their incomes to keep them.

At age thirty, the average household must now devote 44 percent of its monthly earnings to owning a new home—double what young homeowners had had to pay ten years before.47

Given this elemental setback in their living standards, it was particularly ironic that younger people voted so enthusiastically for the President, but then the Democratic Party was also largely silent on the subject. As a practical matter, both political parties had retreated from the goal of universal homeownership, first the Democrats, when they abolished interest-rate controls in 1980, then the Republicans, by adopting an economic strategy that assigned a lower priority to providing homes for people. The decline of homeownership, if the government did nothing to reverse it, represented a major redefinition of the American idea of prosperity.

Throughout the recovery, however, the trend of lost potential was masked by the general abundance of consumption. After all, consumer demand, as defined by economists, was quite strong. Personal income rose vigorously on average. The Reagan recovery was driven largely by personal spending (though, to be sure, a larger share of what Americans bought was imported from abroad). How could both be true—a pro-consumption recovery that was simultaneously losing millions of the potential customers for cars, houses and other goods?

Higher interest rates were part of the answer. The other explanation was the maldistribution of incomes. In the aggregate and on average, the money income available to consumers for buying things looked more than ample. When one looked closer, it was clear that a huge share of the increased money income was going to upper-income families (including the celebrated Yuppies). A decreasing share of national incomes was going to all the families on the bottom half of the economic ladder, people who would also buy cars and houses and other nice things, if they could afford them.

According to the Bureau of the Census, the median real income of the bottom 40 percent had fallen from 1980 to 1984, about $477 per family, a loss of more than 3 percent. The top 10 percent, meanwhile, enjoyed an increase of $5,085 in their median income, an increase of more than 7 percent. The pivotal political decisions of the 1980s, from the Reagan economic program to Volcker’s monetary policy, all contributed to the regressive shift in incomes. What was lost by those who depended on wage incomes was gained by those with interest incomes.48

Not surprisingly, people whose real incomes were shrinking did not make very good consumers. The economy was carried forward by those who had plenty of money to spend, the upper half. The others, especially young people, simply had to settle for a scaled-down version of the old dream. In general, they were the Americans who were buying fewer cars and houses than they used to buy.

People with inadequate real incomes had one other option—they could borrow the money. By going deeper into debt, they could keep spending and hope that their prospects improved. Millions of families understandably chose that option. Personal debt accumulated rapidly. The increased savings that supply-side economics was supposed to deliver not only did not occur but the savings rate fell to new lows. Families were inclined to borrow rather than forgo purchases, because it was difficult to accept the new reality of their reduced status— especially difficult when the clamor from politics and the news media insisted that Americans were embarked on a new era of prosperity.

The mass market was splitting apart, as Fortune magazine had said, but it was also getting smaller. The emerging pattern had profound implications for the future performance of the American economy, not to mention family living standards, yet it did not become an absorbing question for economists. When economists calculated “consumer demand,” it was not the sum of what people needed in their lives, the standard that Thorstein Veblen had proposed for an efficient economy. Consumer demand simply consisted of the total money available to the people who could afford to buy things.

For modern economists, the question of which people had the money or what they would spend it on seemed irrelevant. The fact that some families were buying second homes for vacations or third cars while others could not afford their first home or car was considered a social question, not a problem for the economy. Since most modern politicians relied on the economists’ definitions, they perhaps did not perceive what had changed.

In the long term, however, if the trends were not reversed, the shrinking mass market would become a political question. Was this what average Americans expected from their economy? Or what political leaders had promised them? To use Lyle Gramley’s word, the political implications were dynamite, waiting to explode.

The ultimate irony in Paul Volcker’s triumph over inflation was that, in the larger sense, the Federal Reserve actually failed to accomplish its historic purpose. The overriding responsibility of the central bank was to control the overall expansion of credit in the economy, to insure that the society’s ambitions did not get ahead of reality and thereby overburden the future with debt. This time, for reasons partly beyond its control, the Federal Reserve was unable to fulfill its most basic function.

Americans, on the contrary, were borrowing during this economic recovery at an unprecedented and dangerous pace, both individuals and institutions, both private business and government. Despite its willingness to impose high interest rates, despite its actions to restrain economic growth, the Fed found itself largely impotent in curbing what Paul Volcker called “a national binge of borrowing.”

No one was more troubled by the explosion of debt than the Fed governors themselves. They knew it was like a gun pointed at the future—threatening corporate balance sheets and household solvency alike, inviting widespread failures down the road or, alternately, producing irresistible pressure to bail out debtors by returning to inflation.

Interest rates are the device by which you ration the demand for credit so it won’t be excessive [Governor Partee said]. Yet, if you look at the demand for credit now, it’s extraordinarily large—it’s huge. Government debt is going up, household debt, corporate debt. How can you look at that and conclude that interest rates are too high? I’d say interest rates aren’t high enough. Yet I have to admit the economy isn’t doing very well. It’s a conundrum—extraordinary.

The Federal Reserve chairman worried over the dilemma too. His strategy of restraining the economy on its upswing had required a price for credit that was outrageously high by past standards, real interest rates unmatched in the central bank’s own history. Yet borrowers of every kind were not deterred. For 1984, the Federal Open Market Committee set a goal of 8 to 11 percent growth in total domestic debt, but the economy grossly surpassed the Fed’s target. The nation’s outstanding debt grew by 14.1 percent—the fastest year of new borrowing on record—creating at least $300 billion more in new obligations than the Fed had thought prudent.49

This tremendous debt creation worries me [Volcker said]. Why are people making all these bad loans? People can say interest rates are too high and I might agree with that, certainly by historic standards and by the conditions in the economy. But if interest rates are too high, why is debt expanding so fast? Why is debt growing at a record rate relative to GNP? Apparently somebody out there doesn’t think interest rates are too high.

Despite the inherited folklore, accumulating new debt was not in itself unhealthy. On the contrary, it was a sign of vigor. After all, the modern American economy would not function without the constant lending and borrowing. In general, if families weren’t borrowing, it meant they weren’t buying. If corporations did not go into debt, then they also did not build new factories and expand production and employment for the future. Government debt was creative too, if it stimulated a moribund private economy, if it purchased real economic resources that would make the society more productive in the future —roads and canals, schools and universities, basic research labs and even new factories. By that standard, World War II had been the most constructive borrowing binge in history.

At every level, from households to government, new debt had to be judged by two basic questions of quality, the same questions any careful family would ask itself before taking on a new loan. What was the borrowed money going to buy—something worthwhile or something frivolous that was not worth the price of going into debt? Secondly, what was the likelihood that the family would be able to pay off the loan? These were the same essential tests applied by corporate managers planning a bond issue or, in theory at least, by government economists planning a deficit budget.

In the mushrooming debt of the 1980s, it was those two questions that aroused alarm. A sizable portion of America’s new debt was not buying anything very productive for the future. Much of it was financing immediate consumption, which was invigorating only if consumers could keep up with the payments. And much of the borrowing was used for profitable but empty financial speculation. In 1984, for instance, American business accumulated a staggering $140 billion in new debt that was devoted solely to finance corporate mergers and take-overs. It did not build any new factories.

As the debt mounted, the second question became more alarming. The nation as a whole was taking on debt faster than it was enhancing its ability to repay. Any borrower could do this for a time, counting on his investment to pay off eventually or assuming his income would catch up with his debt obligations. But when the American economy flattened out and lost its robust expansion, the prospects that the nation could collectively catch up with its mounting loans seemed more and more questionable.

The dimensions were awesome. The United States’s total outstanding debt—government and private—was $7.1 trillion at the end of 1984, nearly doubled since 1977. The alarming point was that domestic debt had increased by more than 25 percent in 1983 and 1984 alone. Obviously, debt was growing much faster than the economy as a whole had grown—and the economy was the source of incomes, profits and tax revenues that ultimately must pay off these loans.50

Over the postwar decades, the nation’s total debt, public and private, had expanded in a remarkably steady relationship to the expanding economy—debt normally ran about 40 percent larger than the Gross National Product. Now, the outstanding debt had become more than 60 percent larger than GNP. In that situation, the first question became especially relevant—what did this borrowed money buy for the future? In general, not much. The new debt, for the most part, was not enhancing the nation’s productive potential—its ability to catch up with the loan payments.

The Fed’s inability to restrain the “borrowing binge” was the central contradiction of Paul Volcker’s tenure as chairman. If one looked at interest rates, Volcker’s monetary policy seemed punishingly stringent. Yet, if one looked at the explosion of credit, Volcker seemed wildly generous. There were two basic explanations. Volcker’s own strategy and the central bank’s own policies themselves helped to stimulate the rapid debt accumulation. But the other reason for the Fed’s loss of control was a political decision. Congress had effectively stripped the Federal Reserve of its ability to constrain debt expansion when it enacted the financial deregulation legislation back in 1980.

Volcker himself had understood the hidden consequences of financial deregulation, though probably few members of Congress who had voted to abolish all remaining interest-rate controls in 1980 appreciated that it would also undermine the Federal Reserve’s monetary control. Because of that legislation, the economic recovery that unfolded in 1983 and 1984 was unlike any other in modern experience— the first business cycle since the 1920s that proceeded without any arbitrary federal limits on interest rates. The market was free at last and the market of the 1980s produced the same thing it had produced in the “roaring twenties”—a burgeoning accumulation of dubious loans.

Since New Deal days, the government’s various interest-rate ceilings—in addition to subsidizing borrowers—had acted like crude cutoff valves in the plumbing of finance. Once market interest rates reached the legal limits and could go no higher, money flowed away from the financial intermediaries as depositors pulled out, looking for better returns elsewhere. Banks and savings and loans that were losing deposits had no choice but to stop lending. The expansion of new debt naturally moderated (though not without great anguish and uproar from the disappointed borrowers and financial institutions caught in the “credit crunch”). If the Fed wished to slow down borrowing, it simply pushed interest rates closer to the cutoff point—and the supply of new credit was automatically curtailed.

Once the government controls were dismantled, however, the lenders were free to charge whatever the traffic would bear. And the Fed was left with only one lever of restraint—raising interest rates. To curb lending, it had to push rates up literally to a point where the traffic could no longer bear it—depressing the demand for loans by setting an exorbitant price, driving off some loan customers, usually the smallest and weakest.

As Philip Braverman, economist at Briggs Schaedle, explained:

The emphasis is on making credit too expensive to want, not on reducing access to it. The hope is that the marketplace will allocate credit rationally. The hope is that borrowers won’t continue to borrow and lenders will restrain lending. We make the market the only arbiter of credit allocation and whether credit is excessive. But it’s perverse—making credit too freely available is ultimately inflationary.51

The Fed’s single lever—raising interest to exorbitant levels— worked brutishly but effectively during Volcker’s first years in office when the Fed’s objective was to induce a recession and break inflation. The Fed had to push the prime rate as high as 21 percent to get the desired results and many victims suffered added damage, but the contraction did accomplish its purpose.

Once the economic recovery began, however, the central bank was in a new dilemma. It kept interest rates very high, but it dared not push them still higher and risk killing off the new recovery. As the Fed discovered, even its very high level of interest rates still wasn’t high enough to persuade lenders and borrowers to slow down the creation of new debt. The free market distributing new credit was as undisciplined as was the federal government spending more than it took in.

The only restraining influence you have left [a senior Fed official complained] is interest rates, restraint which works ultimately by bankrupting the customer. It obviously hurts people more. In the typical economist’s vision, this is a wonderful world. Interest rates go up half a point and so many points are added to the cost of the loan and therefore lending slows. This is more theoretical than real.

Now, a lot depends on the mood people are in. When we had interest-rate controls, the banks were stuck for funds and they couldn’t lend. It didn’t depend on the mood the banker was in. Now, without any ceilings, if the lender and the banker are both feeling optimistic, they can go on forever. Or they think they can.

The infectious optimism of Ronald Reagan was shared generally, leading both sides of the credit transaction to overestimate the future. Just as the President was undeterred by the soaring cost of federal debt, so were families and businesses (and their bankers) undeterred by the real debt burdens they took on. Across a broad front of economic activity, both debtors and creditors made high-risk gambles on the future, betting that the loans could somehow be paid off, despite the high interest costs and declining economic growth. Albert Wojni-lower, the chief economist at First Boston, had predicted as much in 1980 when the financial deregulation legislation was enacted. By 1984, his warnings were confirmed.

“No doubt,” Wojnilower observed, “there exist interest-rate levels high enough to curb private credit demand, but the experience of the 1980s to date, featuring good times and bad, and intervals of double-digit as well as zero inflation, suggests they lie well beyond the range of recent observations.”52

Beyond that basic explanation, however, the Federal Reserve itself was also implicated in the explosion of debt, in ways that were never acknowledged. The central bank had set out to establish stable money and it succeeded, but its relentless campaign against price inflation also created basic pressures to borrow more—new incentives to get into debt. By turning the tables on money values, for instance, the Fed essentially shifted the arena of inflationary speculation from tangible assets to financial assets. During the 1970s, as Fed governors often lamented, people borrowed money in order to speculate on real assets—buying houses and farmland, artworks and gold and other commodities, confident that inflation would appreciate their values. In the 1980s, the inflated values and speculative borrowing turned to paper—a bewildering proliferation of new financial instruments that could now deliver quick profits, thanks to the Fed’s hard-money policy.

In both instances, people were essentially gambling on the money question, betting on inflation or its opposite. There was nothing about the financial speculation of the 1980s that suggested it was less intense or wasteful than the commodity speculation of the 1970s. When speculators profited on inflation in the seventies by buying houses, farmland, oil leases, the process at least stimulated the production of real goods—more houses, more farm commodities, more oil. Aside from personal profits, the only thing produced by the dizzy run-up of financial prices in the eighties was more paper. When price inflation moved to Wall Street, the Federal Reserve did not challenge it.

The Federal Reserve’s stabilization of money was also an underlying cause driving the frenzy of corporate take-over battles in the 1980s— including the “junk bonds” and leveraged buy outs and deepening corporate debt that the central bankers deplored. T. Boone Pickens goes after Unocal. Carl Icahn raids Uniroyal. Capital Cities swallows ABC and General Electric grabs RCA. Ivan Boesky becomes a household name. Instead of the noble function of capital formation, investment bankers were preoccupied by this lucrative game of sharks. The stories of high-stakes combat over corporate ownership were no longer exciting once they became commonplace.

While corporate raiders talked righteously about defending stockholders against slothful corporate managers, the fundamental force that motivated most of these “deals” was a direct result of the changed economic world the Fed had created—real assets languished and financial assets soared. The aim of the corporate manipulations was to extract capital invested in a company’s less profitable real assets, its factories and buildings, so the wealth could be redeployed in the financial assets that offered much higher returns. This was accomplished partly by cannibalizing a company, selling off various parts and taking the cash, and by putting the company deeper into debt—borrowing now against its future earnings. Though the techniques differed, the process of recapitalization under way in the eighties was in essence no different from the financial manipulations by J. P. Morgan and his contemporaries early in the century or the speculative stock-market games that financiers played in the 1920s.

Nearly every player profited immediately, from the stockholders who got a higher price for their shares to the investment bankers who collected handsome fees for brokering the deals. The potential losers were mostly in the future—when the weakened corporation, saddled with more debt than it could sustain, failed. The game for today, however, was getting the money out of a company’s assets—converting equity ownership into debt. With and without take-overs, U.S. corporations retired $72 billion in corporate stock shares in 1984, replacing it with an equivalent amount of new corporate debt. The future was mortgaged, but nothing had happened to make the future more productive.

“For a corporation, there is one fundamental difference between equity and debt,” Governor Partee explained. “You are not required to pay a dividend to stockholders if your profits are down. But if you don’t service your debt, you go bankrupt. So corporations are much more exposed than they used to be.”

The Federal Reserve deplored the practice and even introduced regulations to curb the use of the “junk bonds” used to finance many of the corporate buy outs. Nonetheless, so long as monetary policy maintained such high real returns for financial investments and simultaneously depressed the return from real assets, smart investors would naturally seek ways to get their capital out of one and into the other.

The financial market’s “casino instincts,” as Albert Wojnilower called the high-risk games, were also encouraged by the Federal Reserve’s protective response to the banking crisis. The blanket guarantee to creditors extended by the government to keep Continental Illinois afloat sent a message to investors—your money is safe in any bank or brokerage large enough that the Fed cannot let it fail. The risk would be borne by others, including U.S. taxpayers.

Henry Kaufman of Salomon Brothers concluded:

This growth in credit is nourished by . . . the willingness of our government to spread an official safety net over a variety of participants which tends to reduce the risk of borrowing. No large business corporation is allowed to fail. No large financial institution is allowed to fail. No institution that has depositors is allowed to fail in its obligation to depositors, large or small. Federal credit agencies that get into trouble are not allowed to fail. So there is the kind of official safety net that’s spreading and that is perceived by the marketplace.53

Finally, the debt explosion was driven substantially by Paul Volck-er’s own strategy for monetary policy. The high real interest rates, though intended to restrain, actually forced many to borrow more and more, just to keep up with their old debts. This was as true for debt-burdened farmers and oil drillers as it was for Third World countries of Latin America. For that matter, it was also true for the U.S. government. As a practical matter, many borrowers had no choice but to borrow more, even if they knew the added debt was imprudent and the interest costs were exorbitant. Not to borrow meant going under.

Edward Sonnino, a Wall Street portfolio manager, argued:

These abnormally high interest rates by themselves—whether caused by the budget deficits or by the Fed—have paradoxically been an important, if not the main, cause of skyrocketing debt. Normally, of course, high interest rates deter borrowing. But excessively high interest rates can have the perverse effect of increasing borrowing, which is precisely what has happened over the past few years.54

The most visible example of how this worked was the LDC debt (though, of course, it was not a part of the U.S. domestic debt burden). When South American and Caribbean nations reached the peak of their crisis in 1982, they had sunk $330 billion into debt. Everyone agreed they had borrowed too much. Two years later, according to World Bank statistics, these countries were $374 billion in debt— further in the hole.

Their new loans, obligated at the high real interest rates, were devoted mostly to paying the interest due on their old loans. The more they borrowed at the high rates, the more they would need to borrow in the future to pay interest due. Though several countries showed improvement, most were compounding their real debt burdens—the crucial measure of whether they could sustain the lending. In 1981, the foreign debt owed by these countries was 38 percent of their total GNP; by 1984, it was 61 percent. Likewise, their debts were growing faster than their export income was expanding. Paul Volcker’s management of the international debt crisis was gradually reducing the exposure of the major U.S. banks but, meanwhile, most of the debtors were in worse shape.

How long could they go on? As long as bankers and international lending agencies would lend them new money so they could keep paying the interest on the old debt. It did resemble a “Ponzi game,” as Henry Wallich had suggested.

The effects were less dramatic, but the same erosion was working away on many American borrowers, families and businesses compelled to borrow more to stave off foreclosure or failure. On average, household balance sheets did not look endangered—rising incomes were more or less keeping pace with debt. But that overlooked the maldistribution of incomes and the fact that a large share of America’s families were borrowing more because their real incomes were declining. In effect, they borrowed the money from the upper half—the families whose income shares were larger, thanks to high interest rates and other government policies.

“There’s been quite a lot of redistribution of income toward the higher-income groups,” Governor Partee explained. “It requires consumers to accumulate more and more debt. The high-income people invest their increased income in financial assets—money which gets borrowed by everyone else.”

The borrowers were burdened with an additional risk because adjustable-rate loans were now in general use, both for home mortgages and for major business loans. The agreement often gave the borrowers the enticement of a low rate at the start, but one that could escalate sharply in the future. The lending institutions had protected themselves from risk of rising rates and were therefore more willing to lend. The only way the lenders would lose was if their loan customers failed and defaulted.

Even the federal government’s huge deficits and rapidly accumulating debt were driven, in part, by the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy. Volcker and the Fed, of course, stood foursquare against the deficits and did not think of themselves as partly responsible. But the strategy of high interest rates adopted by the central bank damaged the government’s balance sheet too. It slowed down economic growth and therefore reduced tax revenues. Meanwhile, the high rates on Treasury bonds raised the cost of government borrowing enormously —adding as much as $30 or $40 billion to the federal deficits. Like many other debtors, the government had no choice but to pay the higher price and keep on borrowing.

The Federal Reserve, from its own perspective, did not have much choice either. The Fed applied the only lever it had available and in the short term it worked: prices held steady or declined. In the long term, however, the Fed’s monetary policy appeared to be perversely self-defeating. Without other controls on the supply of credit, the high interest rates propelled the economy deeper and deeper into debt and created a new instability, the opposite of what Volcker had set out to accomplish. Bloated credit was the usual preamble to inflation. At some future point, the central bank would face a hard choice: should it let all debtors fail or should it bail them out by allowing price inflation to resume?

The Federal Reserve, given the absence of other controls, was in a political bind. If it relaxed the price of money, it would be criticized by the bondholders for yielding, for losing control. Yet if it continued to push so hard, it risked popular fury—eventual bankruptcy for lots of loan customers and devastating loan losses for lots of banks. By the end of 1984, more than seven hundred banks were listed as “problem banks,” a list that would eventually grow to twelve hundred. The United States was about to become a net debtor to the rest of the world. A new debt crisis was developing, only this one was centered in the United States, not the Third World. No one in power was doing much to stop it.

Among the most important players in Washington, including the Federal Reserve, there was almost no public discussion of these underlying causes or how to extricate the political economy from the debilitating consequences. The solution was obvious: the federal government would have to reimpose other kinds of controls on banking and credit markets, legal limits that could contain the supply of credit, particularly the most dubious lending, so the Fed would not have to rely solely on the extreme punishment of high interest rates. The new controls could take many forms, from interest-rate ceilings to income-tax penalties to direct regulation by the central bank of how banks and other lending institutions allocated their lending. Controls would mean more equity—but also more stability. If Congress wanted lower interest rates from the Fed, the surest way to get them would be to create different mechanisms to control the expansion of credit.

In the Reagan era’s ethos of free markets and less government, there was no prospect that politicians of either party would pursue this solution. Indeed, the political influence of commercial bankers was pushing in the other direction—toward greater freedom from legal restraints. The largest banks sought the power to operate nationwide, a consolidation of financial power that would inevitably centralize the political influence of banking in a handful of very large institutions. They also lobbied for the right to enter into other business sectors— where they would enjoy enormous advantages over competitors since they would still be protected from failure by the federal government, thanks to their special status as commercial banks.

Lobbyists from money-center banks (and Reagan administration officials) were outraged when Paul Volcker urged caution on further deregulation. He dragged his feet and lobbied Congress to proceed slowly. But, powerful as he was, the chairman of the central bank was not about to challenge the orthodoxy of his own constituency and become the foremost advocate for the reregulation of finance.

The only voices persistently and persuasively raised in behalf of restoring credit controls were, ironically, from major investment-banking firms of Wall Street—the conservative citadels of capitalism. Financial experts like Henry Kaufman, Albert Wojnilower, Philip Braverman and others warned repeatedly of the risks of the debt explosion and proposed various ideas for imposing new legal limits on lending.55

None of their proposals received any serious examination in Washington. Strange as it seemed, leading gurus of Wall Street were urging the federal government to impose new discipline on finance and the leaders of government in Washington would not listen to them. It was another measure of how much the mainstream political opinion had shifted. In the political capital, the new mythology held that the federal government had at last gotten out of the business of regulating finance. And the free market was producing all the benefits predicted for it.

The Wall Street economists knew it wasn’t so. The free market was always itself a fiction. The reality, of course, was that the Federal Reserve still regulated credit. It regulated the price. Yet it was unable to control the growth of debt. The 1980s established that trying to control credit by interest rates alone was fundamentally ineffective, in addition to being so inequitable. It was certain to punish the borrowers, especially the weakest ones, while it rewarded the lenders excessively. Yet it also did not prevent folly.

It was possible, of course, that political leaders might in time recognize the injustice and the economic dangers inherent in the Federal Reserve’s dilemma and begin to take remedial action. But that was not likely. To reverse fields so abruptly, to abandon the logic of deregulation that both Democrats and Republicans had embraced in the previous decade, would require a dramatic shift in the conventional wisdom shared among the political elites—the elected officials, the economic experts whom they consulted, the news media that communicated acceptable political thinking. All these groups, in general, were committed to the new status quo.

In American history, fundamental shifts in the economic orthodoxy usually did not occur until after there was a large and painful calamity, a visible crisis like the financial collapse of 1929 or the Great Depression that followed. The awful consequences from such an experience discredited the prevailing wisdom and suddenly opened the way for new thinking. It was only after a disaster, unfortunately, that most politicians and most economists were able to entertain ideas they had previously dismissed as unthinkable.

1

have more sympathy for taking the dollar into account than anyone else on the committee. But what do you do about it? Should we have been considerably easier, looking at the dollar? In my own terms, I thought that until you had a more settled psychology on inflation and more confidence in the economy, it was going to be hard to ease—particularly when the real source of the difficulty is coming from somewhere else.





