18 THE TRIUMPH OF MONEY


Catastrophe was general in Iowa. Thousands of farmers faced liquidation on old debts or their banks refused to grant new credit for the approaching growing season. The value of Iowa farmland was decreased by half and small towns withered as the local commerce disappeared. Iowa lost fifty thousand of its citizens. The price of corn, which had been above $3.50 only a few years earlier, fell steadily, headed toward a ruinous low—corn at $1 a bushel.

The Middle West and other regions were trapped in an economic phenomenon beyond the living experience of most Americans—deflation. Since World War II, Americans had become accustomed to one constant, rising prices. In the forty-year upward slope of modern inflation, the only thing that varied was how fast prices were increasing. In 1985, agriculture and other basic producers of the American economy were engulfed by a crisis of the opposite nature—the persistent, crippling effects of falling prices.

On a farm near Unionville, Iowa, a group of distressed farmers gathered in the living room of Clifford and Evelyne Burger to exchange tips on fending off the bank foreclosures, to console one another and to search for answers. The Burgers had been missing debt payments sporadically since 1983; the local bank had just turned down their loan application for spring planting, the money to buy seed and fill their fuel tank for the ’85 crop. The Burgers and their friends thought they had found the explanation. Their failure, they decided, was caused by a remote conspiracy of bankers, operating through the Federal Reserve.

“First, the Powers pump up inflation, then they start the propaganda that we have to reduce inflation,” Jim Phillips, a grain farmer from Centerville, explained. “They established this policy for the personal gain of the Federal Reserve and the bankers that control it. They saw the coffee shortage, the oil shortage, the sugar shortage. The Powers found out that it works. Why not a money shortage?”

Mrs. Burger distributed an illustrated pamphlet entitled “Billions for Bankers, Debt for the People,” a polemical tract on the money question that was circulating widely in Iowa and the other afflicted farm states. The Federal Reserve, the pamphlet explained, was “a system of Banker-owned Mammon that has usurped the mantle of government, disguised itself as our legitimate government, and set about to pauperize and control our people.”

The farmers talked quite familiarly about this conspiracy against them, reciting old names and obscure events from the Federal Reserve’s early history. A web of international bankers had designed the central bank back in 1913 in order to dominate the world; their unseen control extended to grain companies, major conglomerates, the financial markets and the news media. These manipulations, the farmers earnestly explained, were guided by the “Power 300” and the “Inner Circle” and, ultimately, by the “Zionist Jewish conspiracy.”

“Even in the Bible,” Cliff Burger interjected, “you’re not supposed to have usury. It’s usury that’s killing us.”

“The Federal Reserve dictates to Reagan,” said John Sellers, Jr., another young farmer awaiting his foreclosure notice. “Everyone says there is a shortage of money, but it isn’t so. If they wanted more money, they pretty well could print it up. The Federal Reserve is the biggest hoax ever played. Ninety-nine percent of the people think it’s a branch of the government.”

Like others, John Sellers was trying to combat the personal depression that accompanied economic failure. “It’s a very gray world and you feel like you’re ninety years old,” he said. “You’re in quicksand and there’s no way out. People take to bed and sleep and sleep and sleep.” Many blame themselves. “When the hammer finally falls,” Sellers said, “you look back at the decisions you made and the decisions you could have made and you go through a terrible period of depression, of guilt.”1

In Iowa as well as other distressed areas, farmers found some solace in the realization that others were failing too, even some of the best farmers among them who had managed most efficiently. Therefore, it could not be their fault alone. There must be some larger explanation. Some farmers focused their anger on the giant grain-trading companies and accused them of price manipulation. Others blamed the strong dollar and Latin-American debt. Or the crisis was attributed to particular mistakes by Jimmy Carter or Ronald Reagan, Democrats or Republicans.

Others, an intense minority with extreme views, resurrected the old conspiracy theories that had surrounded the Fed’s mysterious powers since its origin. The farmers studied the baffling facts of money creation and the anomalous status of the Federal Reserve at the center of elected government and they decided, not illogically, that only a powerful conspiracy could have created such a bizarre arrangement. It was Morgan and Rockefeller and the Jews who had plotted to ruin Iowa. It was the “Powers” that, by controlling money creation, had subverted democracy and usurped the authority of God. The belief in distant conspiracy reflected a shocked disappointment with life, political anger mixed with a deep spiritual distress. In desperate times, confused and powerless people were prepared to believe that their lives were held in thrall by a malevolent hierarchy. The farmers in Iowa were like the Catholic monks of medieval Europe who condemned moneylenders, like the stunned peasants in Colombia who were ensnared by modern capitalism. The farmers in Iowa looked at what money was doing to their lives and they saw the hand of the devil.

There was one other explanation most victims in Iowa and elsewhere did not wish to face—that the American political system itself had decided their fate. The deflation destroying American farmers and other producers was not imposed by remote conspirators, but by their own government in Washington, with the approval or acquiescence of their own elected representatives. The general calamity of falling prices was not a mistake or a random accident of nature or an evil plot. It was the necessary consequence of the economic logic pursued by those who held legitimate political power in the American system, most particularly the Federal Reserve but with the tacit consent of others.

This larger reality was too demoralizing for most victims to accept, even those who understood money and the Federal Reserve’s role in the deflation. It was far easier to believe that their distress resulted from mistakes or misguided policy and would soon be relieved if only enough Americans understood what was happening. Faced with failure, they preferred to conclude that an evil cabal had engineered their ruined lives, using the dreadful powers of the Federal Reserve to undermine justice and self-government.

The political logic that propelled their crisis was not secret. Given the choices made in Washington, deflationary destruction was virtually inevitable. The Federal Reserve was determined to drive the rate of inflation lower and lower, regardless of other consequences, and no one of any influence challenged the Fed’s objective. Indeed, it was fully endorsed by both political parties. As a practical matter, in order to stabilize money’s value at zero inflation or as close as possible, some elements in the economy must be forced into negative levels— held in a state of perpetual losses—in order to offset the rising prices that other economic sectors continued to enjoy. Maintaining the fight against inflation required continuing the liquidation.

The government, especially the Federal Reserve, could not very well acknowledge this unpleasant trade-off, but it was frankly understood in financial markets. With matter-of-fact directness, E. F. Hutton explained the logic to its investment customers:

To our mind, pockets of deflation and an ad hoc program of bankruptcy containment are as much a part of secular disinflation as are low inflation and declining interest rates. If disinflation in this cycle is to work, there must be losers—those who made or financed wrong bets. These negatives, however, are secondary.2

“There must be losers.” The losers, as the Hutton newsletter noted, extended far beyond agriculture. They included the workers, managers and owners in many other sectors—real estate, basic commodities, energy. Labor and basic manufacturing could also be regarded as having made “wrong bets.” The negative effects of the deflation, however, were not “secondary” pockets, as the brokerage claimed. Taken together, the deflationary losses cut a wide and depressing swath across the American economy, from timber in the Pacific Northwest to the “oil patch” of Texas, Oklahoma and Louisiana, from copper mines and cotton farms in the Southwest to grain states on the northern prairie and famous old industrial cities in the Middle West.

Georgia-Pacific closed nine lumber mills, nearly a quarter of its production. Employment in the copper industry had declined by 63 percent since 1980. Firestone Tire & Rubber, in the same period, shrank from 107,000 to 55,000 employees as it closed plants and reduced management. Tire-industry prices had fallen 7 percent while costs rose by 4 percent. Lead, zinc, silver, orange juice and a long list of other products suffered the same fate as oil, wheat, corn and soybeans.

Deflation, once started, fed on itself and would likely persist as long as the authorities did not alter the terms of money and prices. While commodity prices were always subject to wide swings up and down, reacting to seasonal shifts in supply and demand, the persistence of depressed prices exacerbated the condition. The decreased earnings led producers of all types, from copper miners in Chile to grain farmers in the Middle West, to increase their production, and this response merely exaggerated the market surpluses, driving prices even lower.

Deflation gathered momentum gradually through 1984, and by 1985, it had become a fundamental disorder in the economy. Food commodity prices peaked in the first quarter of 1984 and fell by nearly 12 percent over the next year and a half. The income losses for farmers (but not their shrinking collateral) were offset partially by the government price-support payments (and the cost of federal subsidies for agriculture soared to more than $30 billion). Industrial raw materials, unprotected by government programs, suffered a price decline of 16 percent over the same months. Overall, raw-material prices fell by 40 percent from their peaks in 1980. With so many accumulated losers, the American economy could not be healthy.3

The price deflation that unfolded in the middle of the 1980s closely resembled the deflation of the 1920s in its selective damage. The same victims were entrapped by surplus and falling prices in both decades, and their economic predicament likewise was largely ignored—occasionally even applauded—by the rest of the nation. Older Americans remembered the Depression and the general price collapse that followed 1929, when virtually everyone’s prices and wages fell dramatically, but this episode was not like that. Instead, the overall price level, reflected in the Consumer Price Index, remained remarkably stable, rising at about 3 percent or less a year, and the economy in general continued to expand modestly, concealing the simultaneous depression under way in its structure.

The regime imposed a basic inequity that was obvious if one looked behind the average price level. While prices fell for commodities and other goods, inflation continued unabated in service industries, sometimes by as much as 6 or 7 percent. The government made no effort to curb the price inflation in the service sectors (or their wage increases), since it was offset by the negative prices in goods-producing sectors. The government, in fact, had created a split-level economy, fiercely divided between winners and losers. If the “hard money” and selective deflation were to continue for many years, the accumulated destruction might eventually begin to resemble the Great Deflation of the 1880s and 1890s, the era that spawned the agrarian revolt known as Populism.

In both the 1920s and the 1980s, the Federal Reserve was the central engine of control, the economic regulator that imposed these terms. The fundamentals of money had not changed in four generations, despite the many innovations elaborated by modern finance and government economic managers. In broad outline, Paul Volcker’s management of money and the economy followed the pattern set by Benjamin Strong, the New York Fed president who had dominated America’s new central bank during its early decades and whose performance had also been celebrated as a triumph of central banking.

Across six decades, Paul Volcker and Benjamin Strong were like-minded men of finance, who shared the same conservative values. Both were strong-willed crisis managers, esteemed for their awesome grasp of the interlocking complexities of money and banking. Their imperious intellects were also intimidating. Both men assumed the central bank’s first obligation was to protect the banking system from crisis and chaos and they worked strenuously to do so. More important, Volcker and Strong were both absorbed—if not obsessed—by a single-minded conception of economic order. For both of them, economic order was defined, above all else, by the stable value of money.

To achieve that ideal, a currency that held constant value, the Federal Reserve proceeded in both decades to first induce a brutal liquidation, the suppression of economic activity designed to break an inflationary surge. Just as the twenties opened with the severe recession engineered by the Federal Reserve in 1920-1921, Volcker’s management produced the devastating contraction of 1981-1982. The lever for halting inflation in both cases was a traumatic and unprecedented increase in the price of money—forcing business activity to subside and surpluses to accumulate. The accompanying destruction, it was argued, was the necessary prelude to long-lasting prosperity, an era of order and stability in which all could benefit.

After each contraction, however, in order to preserve the stable price level, the central bank did not give free rein to the economy in recovery. The Federal Reserve, instead, managed money and interest rates in such a way that the surpluses remained—surplus labor, surplus grain, surplus oil, surplus goods—and these surpluses continued to suppress prices and wages. For relatively long periods, therefore, Volcker and Strong each succeeded in maintaining an economy free of inflation. Both men were widely admired for this achievement.

The maintenance of low inflation, however, required a condition of continuing failure for many. The average price level was prevented from rising because certain prices continued to fall. Through the twenties, farmers never really recovered from Benjamin Strong’s devastating recession of 1920-1921, and farmers did not recover from Paul Volcker’s in the 1980s. Nor did organized labor, nor mines and mills, nor the oil industry and certain other producers.

Stable money was, ultimately, an illusion. It was nothing more than a statistical artifice that concealed harsh realities. In both eras, the Federal Reserve was celebrated for accomplishing what it took to be its highest purpose, the virtual elimination of dollar inflation. Neutral money was the golden mean, what nearly everyone thought they wanted. Yet the ideal was merely an economic abstraction and it was not neutral. It was simply an averaging of gains and losses that produced the comforting illusion of balance.

The condition of stable money conveyed a satisfying sense of social order. Yet the reality was continuing disorder. In the real economy, stable money led to a fiercely inequitable division of advantage: some economic interests continued unrestrained in their ability to raise prices and wages, while others were consigned to permanent decrease and were bound to fail if the condition persisted. The illusion was, naturally, most persuasive to those who were not destroyed by it.

The paradox of money—an economic order that required continuing destruction—was obvious in outline, yet it was largely ignored in both the 1920s and the 1980s. Stable money was a central value in the social mythology created by economics, a core belief of democratic capitalism. In their own lives, people were relieved to see that the anxieties of rising prices were now mostly extinguished. They were disposed to believe that a stable dollar gave no artificial advantage to anyone. An aura of progress and contentment suffused the nation in both eras.

The conservative political context—exemplified by Ronald Reagan and his personal idol from boyhood, Calvin Coolidge—lent encouragement to the Federal Reserve’s singular objective of “hard money.” With no substantial opposition from politics, the central bank was free to pursue its own idea of economic order and to discount the contradictory evidence of human loss and failure. Competing ideas of economic well-being—abundant growth, full employment, a favorable environment for all sectors—were assumed to be less important. As a political value, money was triumphant. As a social reality, money was more convincing than the tangible suffering of assorted victims.

Indeed, the restoration of stable money produced a smug sense of moral satisfaction, in which the “roaring twenties” served as a crude precedent for the “go-go eighties.” Those who succeeded indulged in elaborate fantasies of ostentatious consumption. Those who failed, amid the general prosperity, were blamed for their own mistakes. Farmers and oil producers, it was said, had borrowed excessively in the past, pursuing unrealistic expectations about the future. Their punishment, though regrettable, was justified by their own imprudence. The rationale ignored what had actually transpired: the government itself had drastically and abruptly altered the terms for the future. Its actions put all debtors at a sudden disadvantage, the wise and the unwise alike, with no real opportunity to adjust to the changed circumstances. For the weakest, the only available adjustment was to stop doing business.

The default of producers, it was said further, would enhance the efficiency of the nation, as the weak and marginal were weeded out. Deflationary pressures did indeed force producers to cut their costs and eliminate waste, but the central consequence was merely a consolidation of ownership. Farmland in Iowa did not disappear when its value collapsed and the farmer defaulted on his loans. Nor did oil rigs and reserves in Oklahoma or Texas. They were acquired at depressed prices by other owners who could operate profitably in the new environment of deflation because they had invested so much less. Ownership of family farms passed on to large-scale corporate enterprises. Oil reserves held by failing independent producers became the property of their creditors. The ultimate effect of the liquidation in the 1980s, just as in earlier episodes of deflation, was to further concentrate the ownership of wealth.

With neither political party prepared to represent them on the money question, farmers and the other victims of deflation protested impotently. Their complaints were often misdirected at subsidiary issues, and even when they did challenge monetary policy itself, their arguments were deflected by the Federal Reserve’s imposing mystique. Dissent was intimidated by Paul Volcker’s awesome reputation.

Just as in the 1920s, the primacy of Volcker and the Fed was essentially an act of political deference. Benjamin Strong’s stewardship had been hailed as the first significant triumph of technocratic government, in which disinterested managerial experts took control of policy from the raw and unruly forces of politics. Government would become professionalized, rational and efficient like business, insulated from the random folly of popular opinion. Paul Volcker, the austere technician, oblivious to his own personal gain, enjoyed the same deference. He was admired for his wisdom and competence and, like Ben Strong, for his willingness to defy and dominate elected politicians.

Benjamin Strong’s era was described, in Milton Friedman’s monetary history, as the “high tide” of the Federal Reserve System. For a number of years, the central bank succeeded in stabilizing money. Volcker’s era, for the same reasons, was a second time of triumph for the Fed. Before his death, Strong was widely congratulated for astutely steering the American economy into a “new era”—free of the old excesses, no longer threatened by periodic panics and crashes. So, in his own time, was Paul Volcker. The good feeling generated by stable money in the twenties collapsed abruptly in the autumn of 1929. Paul Volcker’s regime, praised for the same accomplishments, was accumulating the same vulnerabilities, the same victims.

Back in the 1920s, Benjamin Strong was once accosted by angry farm leaders, demanding an explanation for the ruinous decline in their prices. He dismissed them coldly. “You inquire as to the man who gave the order for deflation,” Strong said. “I know of no order being given.”4

In February 1985, Paul Volcker had a similar moment of confrontation. A delegation of state legislators from thirteen distressed farm states—Iowa, Nebraska, the Dakotas and others—traveled to Washington to plead for relief. In the magnificent boardroom of the Federal Reserve, the chairman listened to the farm representatives argue for easier money, for lower interest rates and an end to the price deflation. His response chilled them.

“Look,” Volcker said, “your constituents are unhappy, mine aren’t.”5

The essence of monetary policy, despite the complexities, was always a choice of values. The men and women who sat around the boardroom table were necessarily preoccupied with technical issues, but the implicit question at the core of their decisions could never be reduced to scientific solution, with a right answer or a wrong one. Which economic goals mattered most? What came first? Paul Volck-er’s sure-handed management of money had effectively decided the priorities for the nation. Others at the table, a stubborn minority, disagreed with him.

Preston Martin, the vice chairman, declared:

The question is: what are your goals? I think unemployment should be lower than 7 percent. I think 2 percent growth is unsatisfactory. We are accepting a lower-than-trend growth rate and a higher-than-trend unemployment rate. For what reason? What is the public good from that choice? “Well,” the others say, “it’s fear of inflation—you don’t want to bring back inflation.” But, look, the inflation of today is a great improvement over the past. Given the improvement in prices we have now, these other goals should be brought to the fore.

Martin’s complaint was a fair summary of the continuing argument that took place within the Federal Reserve. Money was still the first priority to Volcker and the majority, who insisted that the one great goal was to protect the gains already made in reducing price inflation. Preston Martin argued that his colleagues, by exaggerating the risk of renewed inflation, were forcing slower than necessary growth for the economy, higher unemployment, spreading financial strains and instability. “What is the public good from that choice?” Martin kept asking.

The Federal Reserve’s control produced disappointing results in the real economy. Various forecasters kept predicting a revived boom, but it never materialized. The expansion remained fitful and fainthearted, performing far below the economy’s potential and below the historic averages for recovery cycles. From the middle of 1984 onward, after the election-year boom had been broken, the economy settled into a jigsaw pattern of uneven advances—weakening one quarter, then resurgent the next, then weakening again. The Federal Reserve eased or restrained in carefully measured steps, averting a recession but also failing to break out of the lackluster pattern.

“A growth recession must be considered a real threat,” Martin complained publicly. The unemployment rate inched up and down slightly, but basically it remained stuck at slightly above 7 percent—the highest unemployment of any postwar recovery—with no prospect of improvement. Capacity utilization in manufacturing remained stuck at 80 percent or below.

Even the Fed’s own conservative expectations for the economy were disappointed. Over the subsequent twenty-four months, the economy grew in real terms by less than 2.5 percent. That was only a little better than half of the economic growth the Reagan Administration had expected. It was also far below the growth of 3.5 to 4 percent that the Federal Open Market Committee itself had anticipated.

The general disappointment was crisply summarized by Fortune magazine in its report on the 1985 performance of the Fortune 500 corporations.

Overall sales moved up only 2.8 percent, less than the inflation rate. Profits sank 19.1 percent, the worst performance since the recession year of 1982. Slack demand, a strong dollar, and fierce international competition all hurt. Metals, transportation equipment, textiles and mining fared poorly. Even computers and office equipment fell 6.2 percent. Only 242 companies among the 500 showed profit increases and 70 lost money—a record. . . .

Unable to wring satisfactory returns from their traditional businesses last year, many of the 500 companies put efforts into rearranging their existing resources and buying new ones. They restructured through mergers and acquisitions, stock repurchases and leveraged buy outs. . . . The combined dollar value (of the corporate restructurings) came to $191.4 billion. That’s 54 percent more than in 1984 and equivalent to the combined assets of GM, Exxon, Mobil and ITT. Restructuring is popular because many companies see few incentives to invest in plant and equipment.6

In the FOMC debates, Preston Martin had only one consistent ally, Governor Martha Seger, Ronald Reagan’s second appointee to the Federal Reserve Board. Through 1985, Martin dissented twice and Seger cast four dissenting votes and, together, they argued repeatedly for an easier money policy “to promote faster economic growth.” Lower interest rates would have improved prospects for the Fortune

500 and smaller businesses too—stimulating demand by effectively cutting prices, reducing the damage from import competition by bringing down the overvalued dollar.

Inside the Fed, Martha Seger felt even more isolated than Preston Martin. She was a finance professor from Central Michigan State University and a former Michigan state banking commissioner. Seger’s credentials were belittled by Democratic senators who had voted against her confirmation. Volcker himself was upset by her appointment because the White House had not consulted him in advance, as was customary. Once on the board, Seger felt ignored. The Fed, she said, was dominated by its male professional staff, which followed the chairman’s instructions and denigrated other governors.

“I’m not a part of any discussion before these matters occur,” Seger complained. “You are handed an agenda a couple of days in advance. Memos are delivered to our desks. . . . You go in and—bang—you have to vote.” The result, she said, was that individual governors were cut out of the policy-making process. “We have very little input into what I call the formulation stage, which I’m not accustomed to,” Seger said. “In corporate America, there is input all along the lines. In an auto company, the president of the company isn’t exposed to the new models the day he goes down to the auto show.”7

Seger and Martin, though both were conservative Republicans, were assuming the same lonely role on the Board of Governors that Nancy Teeters, the liberal Democrat, had filled during her tenure. They pulled against the orthodoxy by arguing that the tangible reality of economic loss deserved at least as much consideration as the abstract claims of monetary theory. It was a question of priorities.

“Not having Nancy Teeters around,” Martin admitted, “I became the expert on unemployment. I feel there is a real social cost to unemployment that we cannot ignore.”

In political terms, it was especially ironic that Ronald Reagan’s appointees to the Fed sounded much like liberal Democrats in the internal policy debate over money. Reagan, after all, was the most conservative of Presidents and himself a monetarist. Yet his nominees to the Board of Governors all proved to be to the left of Paul Volcker on the money question’s spectrum—more eager to lower interest rates and to foster faster economic growth and lower unemployment. It was never clear whether the President himself understood this role reversal. Nor, for that matter, did the Democratic Party. Democrats, the traditional advocates of easy money, generally sided with Paul Volcker and criticized the Republican appointees whenever they challenged the chairman.

The new alignment inside the Board of Governors was intentional, however. The Treasury and White House officials who had selected Reagan’s Fed nominees wanted new governors who would budge Volcker from his hard policy stance and thus stimulate a more robust economy. At the same time, they realized at last that it was counterproductive to attack Volcker directly or, above all, to create an impression that the Reagan Administration was inviting a return to inflation. Instead, they hoped that subtler pressures would turn the Fed. Politicians, regardless of party label or ideological disposition, responded to real disappointments and grievances. In the politics of money, reality was more persuasive than ideology or abstract theory.

Volcker stood his ground. When the economy weakened in the spring quarter of 1985 and many forecasters worried aloud about a possible recession, Volcker relented—but only slightly. The Board of Governors agreed on May 17 to reduce the Discount rate by .5 percent. Economic growth picked up somewhat subsequently as interest rates declined and recession was averted. Except for that limited concession, however, Volcker was unyielding. Despite the gathering deflation and the disappointing business activity, he kept interest rates at the same high level and declined to do more to help the struggling economy.

Volcker’s unbending posture was reflected most clearly in the Board of Governors’ repeated refusal to grant any additional reductions in the Discount rate, the floor price for credit markets. Throughout 1985, despite the slow growth and accumulating damage from the price deflation, the Federal Reserve Board rejected twelve requests from various Federal Reserve Banks for further reductions in the Discount rate. As a result, short-term interest declined only slightly through the year and the economy continued its stuttering performance. Real interest rates were somewhat lower than the peak levels they had reached in 1984—yet they were still above 7 percent, still higher than the punishing rates the Fed had imposed during the 1981-1982 contraction.

Nine of the petitions for lower rates came from the Dallas Fed, a district where both oil and agriculture, as well as real estate, were caught in the spiral of falling prices. As more producers defaulted, their loan losses were undermining the commercial banks, and some of the major Texas banks were endangered. Both bankers and oilmen feared that a sharp collapse in oil prices would unfold if the Fed provided no relief. The Dallas Federal Reserve Bank, among the most conservative in the System, was pleading week after week for easier money. Its warnings were not heeded.

Paul Volcker’s rationale for standing firm was unchanged. Congress must go first, he argued. The Federal Reserve could not push interest rates lower until the federal deficits were reduced substantially. But now Volcker offered a second rationale for holding his ground—his fear that the dollar’s value might weaken too much or even collapse on foreign-exchange markets. After appreciating enormously over five years, the dollar had finally peaked in February 1985 and its value began subsiding gradually (responding belatedly to the interest-rate reductions executed by the Fed in late 1984). Now, Volcker claimed, the risk was on the other side: a sudden free fall in the dollar might ignite a burst of price inflation.

The chairman’s anxiety about the dollar seemed especially timorous, even precious, considering what was actually occurring in the real economy. The flood of dollar-driven imports was still rising and continuing to decimate U.S. production and jobs. The dollar, in fact, declined steadily and quite dramatically for the next year and a half— with no effect whatsoever on prices and very little relief for America’s trade-sensitive sectors. Volcker’s stature was such, nonetheless, that few challenged his logic. Whatever happened in the economy, the Federal Reserve chairman always seemed to find another reason not to back off.

In a practical sense, Volcker was guided by an anxiety rarely mentioned: the Federal Reserve refused to lower interest rates because it was afraid to challenge the bondholders. If the Fed pushed down short-term interest rates, the long-term investors in the bond market might disapprove. Their continuing worries about inflation were reflected in the extraordinarily high long-term rates demanded in the bond market. If the Fed eased money, it was supposed that the bond investors would feel threatened by inflation and would react by pushing long-term rates even higher.

Paul Volcker and the Fed, in effect, deferred to the bond market’s judgment. They might have challenged it, if they had chosen, simply by driving down interest rates, stimulating faster economic growth, ending the deflation and demonstrating that the investors’ anxieties were mistaken (with the risk, of course, that prices would become more buoyant). The bond market could resist for a time by pushing up long rates, but not forever, if the Fed eased sufficiently.

If the Fed had eased, that would have tested the inflationary fears of the investors against reality: was it really impossible, as the bond market seemed to believe, that the nation could achieve no better than 2 percent growth or 7 percent unemployment if it wanted to avoid another spiral of runaway inflation? Must America forever function at less than 80 percent of its capacity? Or were the bondholders, like Federal Reserve officials, fighting the last war—demanding unnecessary insurance against inflation (and excessive returns on their capital) because they had been burned in previous decades?

The answers would never be known because the Federal Reserve chose not to ask the questions. The psychology of the investors was regarded as a fragile thing that the Fed must handle delicately. Easing money must wait upon an improvement in the market psychology. Interest rates could not move lower until bondholders felt more secure about their money.

This crucial linkage between monetary policy and market psychology was obliquely acknowledged in comments by the chairman and others. Volcker was asked, for instance, why he did not challenge the bond market’s obsession with inflation more forcefully. After all, inflation had been subdued now for nearly four years and the price average was edging downward. The national economy was operating far below its potential, with slack markets for labor and goods, so an inflation driven by the old wage-price spiral was virtually impossible. How long did it take for the bondholders to be convinced? Why didn’t the Fed puncture Wall Street’s mind-set by pushing interest rates lower and demonstrating that the fears of inflation were unfounded?

Volcker brushed aside the question with a laugh, as though he had heard the same plea many times. “Some people think we should do more of that,” he acknowledged. “But you’ve got to balance that against the question: will a test that fails damage the process in the other direction? It might build up doubts about your long-term commitment. Are you holding firm against inflation or are you not?”

The sensibilities of the bond market, thus, were ultimately guiding the U.S. government’s economic policy. The general desire for a healthier economy was stymied by the particular fears of a particular interest group. The Federal Reserve chairman, having restored the central bank’s credibility among financial investors, was unwilling to risk it now by trying to lead them to a lower plateau for the cost of money. Instead, he would follow their lead. When the psychology of investors improved and long rates declined in the marketplace, then the Fed would move too. But it would not go first. And, as long as real interest rates remained so high, the American economy could do no better than fitful stops and starts.

The bond market and its investors enjoyed an enviable position of influence: they profited directly from their own supposed anxieties about the future. In the mythology of economics, markets were treated as disinterested arbiters of reality, individual buyers and sellers who collectively made rational judgments based on the best available information. That is how the Federal Reserve looked upon the bond market. Yet, in the actual scheme of things, the bondholders were not disinterested. They were profit-seeking individuals and institutions that were rewarded handsomely for imposing their priorities on others. Indeed, they had little incentive to relent.

Easier money and a free-running economy threatened the wealth of bondholders and the Fed’s tight money enhanced it. In the present time, the investors enjoyed the higher earnings provided by the high interest rates. For the future, the high interest rates effectively blocked the economy from regaining the vigorous growth that might eventually lead to a new condition of rising prices. In short, the bondholders and other financial investors won both ways. They collected the bonus income of high real rates. Meanwhile, the value of their money was not only protected from the dilution of inflation, but their financial wealth was actually magnified in value as monetary policy drove the prices of real assets lower.

Given the exceptional rewards, it was perfectly natural that the bondholders were reluctant to give them up. Endorsing a more moderate monetary policy would have put their own profits at risk. In their own defense, long-term investors would argue that they must protect themselves against potential inflation somewhere off in the future, even if prices were falling at present. No one could say, of course, what might happen to money’s value 10 or 20 years hence, but this amounted to protection against a distant tomorrow that was provided to no one else in the economy. Short-term investors could not even make that argument. Their extraordinary returns on six-month or one-year notes were collected right now—paid in “hard dollars” that were utterly unthreatened by price inflation.

Even for the long-term investors, the question was how much insurance they required. By 1985, bond investors had accumulated a huge store of profit against the possibility that inflation might some day return. According to the Shearson Lehman Government/Corporate Bond Index, which added interest income and price appreciation, bond returns had averaged 18.5 percent in the four years since 1981 —the most profitable era for bondholders in the twentieth century. Naturally, they did not wish to see the good times end.8

The preferred status of the bondholders and their influence over the Fed’s monetary policy were another way of describing the political triumph of money. The bondholder was preoccupied with one thing— preserving the value of wealth accumulated in the past. That was more important to them than fostering the economic possibilities of the future. The political system, by embracing stable money as its preeminent goal, by allowing the Federal Reserve to set the government’s economic policy on its own, was unwittingly deferring to the bond market too—and acquiescing to the same reactionary values. In the name of stability, the past was defended, the future was denied.

Like the bondholders, Paul Volcker had a personal incentive to hold his ground—not for financial profit, but in terms of the personal esteem that mattered to public servants. The chairman had established his place in history by his success in breaking inflation and restoring monetary stability. Why should he now put all that at risk? In the absence of any effective counterpressures from the political community, Volcker was naturally inclined to defend his accomplishment. If things were somehow to get out of control again, his name would be forever tarnished by the revived inflation, like other Fed chairmen before him, and his moment of great triumph forgotten. The surest way for the Federal Reserve to prevent that from happening was simply to hold money tight, to keep interest rates high, to yield ground only gradually and reluctantly.

At the Federal Open Market Committee meeting in July 1985, the Fed found itself in a particular bind. Volcker was still instructing financial markets to follow M-l as the guide to monetary policy, and now M-l was expanding at a runaway rate of more than 16 percent— more than double the Fed’s target. Yet, at the same time, the economy was growing quite weak, having expanded by only .6 percent in the previous quarter. If the Fed stuck by its principles and slowed money growth, a recession seemed likely. Yet if it allowed the money supply to expand out of control, what would happen to its hard-won credibility?

Recession was the risk the Fed dared not take, not so much because of the political attacks that would doubtless follow, but because of a far more threatening prospect. The financial system, given the burgeoning debts and the deteriorating balance sheets of debtors, was becoming dangerously vulnerable. Texas and Oklahoma oil banks were in trouble. Major corporations were overburdened with debt servicing costs. Hundreds of savings and loans were exposed on shaky real-estate loans. Even the Bank of America, once the largest in the country and now reduced to second place, struggled with huge loan losses in agriculture, oil, shipping, real estate. Latin-American nations depended precariously on selling exports to the U.S. economy in order to keep up with their loan payments to American banks. An economic contraction at this time would threaten all these and perhaps touch off a general sweep of losers—both failed debtors and their creditor banks.

That would be the disaster scenario on the downside [Governor Charles Partee admitted]. Look at all these things—thrifts, farmers, real estate, the corporate debt, the foreign debt. A recession would touch off so many financial problems, spreading through the corporate, agricultural and financial institutions, it would be very difficult to control. It’s a hazard.

I certainly don’t like the looks of what’s developing. It’s kind of a slow fuse.

The Fed chose, instead, to again disregard M-l and let the money supply grow. Formally, the FOMC claimed it was merely “rebasing” its money targets, in effect, starting over for the year. But the practical consequence was to accept the runaway money growth because the alternative was too risky. By year’s end, M-l had grown from $563 to $627 billion, up 11 percent. Yet the economy did not revive in a roaring boom, as monetarist economists confidently predicted from the M-l numbers. The economy remained weak and uneven—despite money.

Sooner or later, overconfident orthodoxy collided with contradictory reality and this was the ultimate embarrassment for monetarism. In the era of disinflation, people simply handled their money differently and so its economic meaning changed unpredictably. The velocity of money was declining sharply again and the usual economic impact attributed to M-l growth was utterly refuted by the sluggish economy. Even Beryl Sprinkel, the most confident monetarist in the Reagan Administration, conceded that theory was confounded. “Nobody knows where we are going,” Sprinkel said.9

The inanity of believing that a single number, constructed by economists, could answer the most basic questions of economic policy was demonstrated by the following M-l statistics. For the five years from 1974 to 1979, M-l grew by an average of 7 percent. It was a period of excessive money growth and roaring inflation. From 1979 to 1984, M-l grew by 7.4 percent. Yet that was a period of tight money and shrinking inflation. How could this be so? The short explanation for the anomaly was that M-l was itself an inconstant value, not the rock of certainty that monetarists claimed.

Milton Friedman, the intellectual father of modern monetarism, was more grudging in admitting defeat. “I don’t feel there has been any repudiation of the theory,” Friedman insisted. “After all, it’s a science in which theories must be tested. So, if we’ve been wrong about some things, they have to be corrected.”10 After years of self-confident predictions and caustic criticism for his opponents, this was as close as Milton Friedman could bring himself to acknowledging that, in the real world, his theory did not work. 1

discipline on monetary policy. The next time the aggregates tell you to tighten when the economy looks weak, you can say: “Look, it would be suicide to follow them.”

The collapse of monetarism as a practical theory involved more than the embarrassment of selected economists. Volcker and the Federal Reserve had embraced the money aggregates too and allowed M-l to guide their policy decisions. The bankers and financial professionals of Wall Street had bought into the same belief, an alluring faith that offered a simple answer to bewildering complexities. Regulating a single economic variable, the money supply, could somehow produce order in all the others. The idea was really just a metaphor—a way of saying that the central bank was willing to concentrate on the abstraction of money alone and to ignore the gross consequences for the real elements of economic life. It served the Fed’s purposes, but monetarism was a costly illusion for the American economy. Belatedly, reluctantly, Volcker abandoned it, this time for good.

Discarding M-l, nevertheless, gave Volcker yet another reason to be cautious about interest rates. By letting the money supply expand enormously, the Fed was leaving itself “absolutely wide open to the next mistake,” as Partee put it. The expanded liquidity was pumping into the system without much effect on the real economy. But if anything happened to change money velocity and alter the transaction patterns of the public, that liquidity could, theoretically, become sudden fuel for an inflationary surge.

In that exposed situation, Volcker felt a strong reluctance to take further risks. He let money go—but he did not lower interest rates and help the real economy. The chairman now had to explain to financial markets that his abandonment of M-l was in no way a retreat from stable money values. This was nothing more than a technical adjustment, he explained. The Fed’s commitment remained firm. To prove it, the Fed kept interest rates from declining.

“We’ve had a big increase in M-l during the period and a decline in the dollar which make me nervous,” the chairman said. “I wouldn’t want to test the market too much in the face of that.”

Volcker’s basic dilemma was only worsened. The instabilities were accumulating in both finance and the real economy. He couldn’t risk a recession for fear of collapsing debtors and their banks. Yet he would not give the economy free rein for fear of losing his hold on stable money.

David Stockman, who left the Reagan Administration in the late summer, described Volcker’s anguish: 2

the recovery. What was he going to do? He had no answer, except to keep adjusting a step at a time. The system is headed for dislocations. There’s no way around it. But system managers like Volcker will find a way to keep things going. They make loans to people who can’t pay them back. They patch things up as best they can.

The Reagan Administration belatedly discovered how to get a handle on Paul Volcker and the Fed—or at least more influence over their decisions. The one legitimate lever the executive branch could use to pressure the Federal Reserve to change its monetary policy was the issue of the dollar’s international value. By law and custom, even the Fed accepted that the President had primary responsibility for managing the dollar and the independent central bank was obliged to heed him. Fed officials had always understood this. It took the Reagan Administration four years to figure it out.

When James Baker left the White House in 1985 to become Secretary of the Treasury, he and Richard Darman, the new Deputy Treasury Secretary, acted on the insight. They abandoned the laissez-faire doctrine that Administration conservatives, including the President, had espoused throughout the first term and began working to bring down the overvalued dollar. Two years before, the CEA chairman, Martin Feldstein, had confidently concluded that the losses to American manufacturing were acceptable. By 1985, it was obvious to both the White House and the Fed that their dollar policy had done intolerable damage. The price disadvantage the dollar caused in international trade was continuing to devastate American manufacturing and agriculture; Baker and Darman were responding at last to the complaints corporate executives and labor leaders had been making for four years.

Treasury’s new activism involved a return to government interventions in.foreign-exchange markets—driving the dollar’s price down by flooding the markets with surplus dollars. Baker and Darman also employed private persuasion to coax Volcker toward lower interest rates.

“We agreed from the start that we would not do any Fed bashing if they don’t do any Administration bashing,” Baker explained. “It’s a two-way street. We ought to be free to criticize monetary policy if the Fed criticizes our fiscal policy. But, before we do that, we ought to try to work it out in private.”

Baker and Darman were, thus, more sophisticated than their predecessors at Treasury about manipulating the Federal Reserve chairman. They began a series of patient policy consultations intended to enlist Volcker’s cooperation and create a united front. The central banks of the world must move in concert, they agreed, to bring down the dollar’s value and back off the high level of interest rates that had prevailed worldwide since Volcker’s initiative in late 1979. Attacking Volcker directly, the Treasury officials appreciated, was a wasted gesture that accomplished nothing except to upset the financial markets. Using the issue of the dollar as its wedge, the Administration would leverage him instead.

“Volcker’s got the power,” one Administration official explained. “We don’t try to order him around. We have got to work with him.”

The visible result of Baker and Darman’s discreet campaign was an accord announced on September 22, 1985, by the five leading industrial nations—the U.S., West Germany, Japan, France and Britain—agreeing to coordinate their central banks’ efforts to correct the currency imbalances. Paul Volcker lent his imprimatur. It was an implicit acknowledgment that the Fed had allowed the dollar to rise too far in the first place. At the very least, the dollar accord would inhibit the Fed from any future tightening of monetary policy. Raising interest rates again would drive the dollar in the wrong direction—upward.

The Baker initiative succeeded on one level and yet failed to deliver the therapeutic results that were expected for the American economy. The dollar continued a dramatic decline in value, but the damage to trade-sensitive sectors was not reversed. It grew worse, regardless. From its peak in early 1985, the exchange value of the dollar had fallen by nearly one-third in a year and a half, as measured against ten other leading currencies. That brought the dollar roughly back to the same value it had held in late 1981. Yet the United States’s trade deficit grew larger and larger, reaching an awesome level above $150 billion a year for 1986—roughly ten times larger than the occasional trade imbalances that had caused alarm in previous decades.

In the mercantilist contest among the great trading nations, America was still losing. Its farmers lost overseas markets and even some of their domestic customers to overseas producers. The same thing happened to other commodities and to a wide range of manufacturing. In part, the continuing damage reflected the delayed effects of the devalued dollar. Eventually, U.S. export-import industries would see the benefits of the new trading terms as foreign competitors were compelled to raise their prices. In the meantime, the loss of American jobs and production became a major political preoccupation. Democrats assailed the Reagan Administration and proposed protective legislation to slow the flow of imports. There was no partisan advantage for Democrats in attacking the Fed, the ultimate source of the trade crisis, and so they blamed Republicans.

But the deepening trade crisis reflected a grim reality of global commerce: once American farmers and manufacturers lost market shares in world trade, it was very difficult to win them back—in many cases impossible. Volcker and Anthony Solomon of the New York Fed had both worried about the long-term consequence during several years as the dollar rose, though they had not done anything to stop it. The regime of the “hard dollar” imposed by the Fed for nearly five years had given foreign competitors a huge price advantage and inflated profit margins too. Now that the dollar was declining, those foreign producers were willing to accept a smaller profit margin rather than raise prices and give up their newly won customers in the U.S.

For many American companies, ones that had closed factories and cut back their employment or moved production overseas, the dollar’s decline was too late. For them, the destruction was permanent. In those terms, the Federal Reserve’s willingness to let the dollar appreciate so drastically and for so long would prove to be a historic error of monetary policy—one that would take many years for America to overcome. Federal Reserve officials were right to agonize over what they had wrought.

The international money system—regardless of which nations won and which lost—was a financial system that did continuing violence to the real producers. Since “floating” exchange rates were adopted in 1973, letting the free markets set the price of currencies, the dollar had moved through a series of what Lee Iacocca rightly called “violent swings” in value, destabilizing trade relationships each time. As long as the present free-market system was preserved, the extreme swings would continue.

Money was meant to be the neutral agent of commerce. Now it had become the neurotic master. In the 1970s, the dollar’s steady decline had injured Arab oil producers and European manufacturers. In the 1980s, when the tables were reversed, American producers suffered far greater losses from the dollar’s extraordinary rise. Now the dollar was falling rapidly again as the major central banks tried to correct the imbalance. Neither governments nor their central bankers were able to sustain equilibrium or even to agree on what a fair balance might be. Instead, trade wars were fought through currencies, the mercantile combat among nations that was as old as capitalism itself.

Reforming international exchange, finding some way to stabilize it, would eliminate the violent swings and reduce the artificial influence of money over commerce. But finding a solution was a daunting challenge on every level, from the technical questions to the political. Some conservatives advocated a return to the gold guarantee behind the dollar, a fixed-value exchange rate much like the Bretton Woods agreement that Keynes had devised at the close of World War II. Others argued for a more flexible solution—a target range of currency relationships and a commitment by all governments to keep their money trading within the range.

Difficult as the technical issues were, the heart of the problem was political. To accept a system of permanent exchange values, some nations would have to surrender their temporary trade advantage. To agree worldwide on stabilizing money values, all nations—particularly the United States—would have to yield a measure of their sovereign discretion. Ultimately, the global trading value of currencies reflected each nation’s domestic economic policies—how much governments spent and borrowed, how much money growth they permitted, their domestic rates of inflation and their interest rates. Each nation’s control over those political questions would be inhibited, even circumscribed, by any international agreement that imposed genuine stability among the rival currencies.

The contest among national currencies was ultimately an expression of the changing realities of power in international politics. When America’s economic hegemony was unquestioned, the U.S. dollar was able to impose order on its rivals, just as the British pound sterling had done in the nineteenth century. But now the U.S. was no longer able to dominate its trading partners in global economics. The competitors were stronger and more independent. America itself was becoming a debtor nation again for the first time in four generations.

How could Washington tell Tokyo what to do now that Japan had become America’s most important creditor? The Japanese lent the United States many billions to finance its growing federal debt—the surplus capital Japan accumulated from the trade deficit. Americans did not yet fully appreciate that the old order, the economic supremacy they had enjoyed since World War II, was gone.

But if the dollar could no longer rule, who could? Perhaps no single currency. Japan was emergent as the major new force in the global economy, but Japan was neither large enough yet—nor sufficiently self-confident—to take command and impose stability on others. The world seemed trapped between eras, an interregnum like the decades of turmoil between World War I and World War II, when the United States was emerging as the strongest nation but was reluctant to take the role of world leader. Once again, no single nation could set the terms for the others and lead alone. This uncertain condition might endure for many years to come. In the meantime, the strongest nations, it seemed, would have to learn how to share the burden.

Less obviously, the international reform of money would also alter the power relationships within governments: the Federal Reserve would be forced to surrender some of its independent power to decide domestic monetary issues on its own. If governments agreed among themselves to maintain stable currency values, the Fed and other central banks could no longer set interest rates or restrict money growth simply to satisfy their own single-minded purposes. Volcker’s dominance, his long run-up of interest rates and the dollar in the 1980s, would not have been possible. Under such a system, the Fed could not have become the “economic czar,” as Frederick Schultz had put it.

The paradox of money was that in order to establish a fixed value for the domestic dollar, the Federal Reserve had to permit the destabilizing appreciation of the international dollar. Monetary reform would compel the Fed to balance its objectives, to manage money so that one value was not distorted at the expense of the other. The central bank would thus have to coordinate its monetary policy more closely with the fiscal policy set by the elected government. The Fed’s decisions would have to harmonize with the broader economic goals of political leaders.

Reforming the instabilities of international money, thus, contained an ironic possibility: the Federal Reserve would become less powerful. Among the politicians who resented the Fed’s independence, only a few understood the implications. Global monetary reform, difficult as the issue would be, was a political opportunity—perhaps the best one available—for elected politics to get control over the unelected Federal Reserve.

“Sensible businessmen do not produce things they cannot sell and certainly they do not build new factories when they have usable factories standing idle.”

The observation by businessman and author George P. Brockway, simple and obvious as it seemed, went to the heart of the matter—the fundamental economic disorder that confronted not just the United States, but the world. The contest of currencies, the political controversies over trade restrictions, were the visible struggles that concealed a much deeper malady, one that was shared by all. The U.S. economy and the world’s were awash in surpluses—an overabundance of available labor, of foodstuffs and raw materials, of manufactured goods. Worldwide, the existing capacity to produce goods far exceeded the aggregate demand for them—a glut of supply.

Given that basic dilemma, nations naturally fought over market shares and erected trading barriers to protect their own producers. Unemployment remained high in most industrial nations and prices remained depressed—all because the world could produce more goods than its markets could absorb. The United States was operating far below its capacity, but so were Japan and West Germany and other major producers. As Veblen said, the problem of business was always first a question of limiting supply.11

The glut was visible in most basic markets: oil and grains, cotton and sugar, steel and copper and other metals. But the excess productive capacity also afflicted many manufactured goods: automobiles and machine tools, personal computers and industrial chemicals, microchips and tape recorders, and many others. The imbalance of supply was, of course, another way of saying that there was inadequate demand. Around the world, there were simply not enough people who had the money to buy all the goods the world’s economies could now produce.

The underlying causes of this disorder were deeper than money— economic changes in the world that had been developing for many years. Two decades of global development, led by multinational corporations and financed by bank lending, had greatly enlarged the world’s productive capacity, building new factories where none had existed a generation ago, creating a much larger industrial base for the world.

Global auto production, for instance, was once dominated by the United States and Western Europe, but now dozens of other countries shared in the process, most notably Japan, but also Brazil, Korea, Taiwan, Mexico and others. In agriculture, as Third World countries learned how to increase their own food production, they naturally became competitors with America’s output. In oil, the soaring prices of the 1970s encouraged both conservation practices by consumers and the development of new sources by producing nations. The long era of inflation put a premium on developing more supply; now the tables were turned and there was too much oil.

The stringent monetary control of the 1980s, led by the Federal Reserve and followed by other central banks, was not the underlying cause, but monetary policy greatly exacerbated the disorder. The high level of interest rates, initiated by the Fed and mimicked proportionately by other central banks, depressed demand worldwide and encouraged the accumulation of surpluses. It was as if all the important governments of the world had decided, simultaneously, to raise the cost of money and price many of their citizens out of the marketplace. Furthermore, the rescue terms that international finance, the IMF and the Fed, imposed on debtor nations in the Third World were guaranteed to shrivel worldwide demand for goods. The nations were required to curb their imports in order to pay the interest on their bank loans. The result was a smaller market of buyers for the world’s supply. Finally, the imposition of high interest rates meant that income shares would flow away from those who would buy things—wage earners, debtors—to those who would simply accumulate more wealth —the creditors.

The paradox of the 1980s was that, in a sense, John Maynard Keynes got the last laugh, after all. The American President who came to power focused the debate on improving the “supply side” of the economy. Keynesian “demand side” economics was eclipsed. The Reagan tax cuts, by directing most of the money to investors, would launch a great burst of capital formation, building new factories, developing more supply capacity. Yet the fundamental disorder of the 1980s was essentially the same one that Keynes and the New Deal liberals had identified—there was already too much supply and not enough demand.

The Reagan tax cuts, combined with the Fed’s tight money policy, obscured this reality with the anomalous conditions they created. The tax reductions did not produce an investment boom for the very good reason cited by Brockway—why build new factories when you can’t sell the goods produced by the old factories? Instead, the fiscal stimulus from the federal deficits drove a boom in consumption—and a burgeoning of debt, both private and public. But, given the overvalued dollar created by the Fed’s tight money, a huge share of the American consumption was captured by the cheaper-priced imports instead of by American-made goods. The U.S. market was buying the surplus production of other economies and allowing American producers to suffer the consequences of the supply glut. Americans, in effect, were carrying the world—and borrowing the money to do so.

The disorder of the eighties—excess supply, inadequate demand and the maldistribution of incomes—was parallel to the underlying conditions that led to the collapse of 1929. There were important differences, including the fact that burgeoning debt in the 1920s did not include huge government deficits and that productivity in the 1980’s was much weaker. Marriner Eccles, the freethinking banker from Utah who became Federal Reserve chairman, described the maladjustments of the twenties in words that seemed uncannily apt for the present.

In the 1920s, our economy was generally prosperous, not, however, without ups and downs nor without dark spots in different industries. Agriculture was not prospering. The coal industry was sick. While the national income rose to high levels, it was so distributed that the incomes of the majority of families were entirely inadequate and business activity was sustained only by a rapid and unsound increase in the private debt structure, including ever-increasing installment buying of consumption.

. . . Foreign loans that ultimately proved to be in large part uncollectible nevertheless furnished an outlet for billions of American savings. . . .

There was an extraordinary expansion of office buildings, hotels, factories and other construction. The giant automobile industry, with all its collateral developments in accessories, servicing and road building, was growing at an unforeseen rate. . . . Our plant, including factories, hotels and office buildings, was becoming excessive. The volume of debt . . . grew too fast, resulting, among other things, in the accumulation in our banking system of a vast amount of assets [or loans] at values that could be sustained only so long as the upward swing of the cycle continued. When this structure finally collapsed, the banks were loaded with unmarketable assets at excessive valuations, the people were weighted down by an excessive burden of debt, and there followed a disastrous deflation that left the country prostrate. . . .12

A similar outcome might yet be avoided in the eighties if governments acted to confront the real economic vulnerabilities, though that seemed unlikely. It would require political leaders not only to abandon the economic orthodoxies that had guided their careers, but also to reconsider the very ideas they had disparaged. The world economy, in short, required a new version of Keynesian economics—but a strategy vastly more complex and far-ranging than the original one.

The same basic questions that New Dealers faced in the 1930s were appropriate—how to stimulate demand, how to limit supply. But now answers would have to be devised in terms of global application. The world was no longer divided, as it had been in Keynes’s day, between wealthy industrial nations and colonial territories that provided the raw materials. The U.S. no longer dominated, either with its trade or currency, and the economic vulnerabilities confronting it could not be resolved alone. If Mexico or Argentina did not get well, then neither would Iowa. If Japan and West Germany and others did not pursue similar strategies, then any action taken by the United States would only aggravate its own weaknesses. Neither elected governments nor central banks were accustomed to proceeding with unified strategies —absent war or other catastrophe.

To stimulate demand worldwide, governments would, first, have to force interest rates much lower, closer to something resembling the historic rate of return on lending. Lower rates would stimulate both consumer demand and business investment and also relax the burden on debtors, from Midwestern farmers to Latin-American nations. Demand would be stimulated if central banks stopped restraining their countries’ economic growth and committed themselves to fostering faster expansion.

Volcker and the Treasury periodically implored Japan and West Germany to lower their interest rates and to provide more stimulus for their economies, but the allied nations were wary—and relatively content. Japan had low unemployment and a trade surplus. West Germany had a deep historic fear of inflation. Both nations and others had been burned in the past by following the American lead and they were reluctant to commit themselves.

“People think I worry about inflation,” Volcker said. “They ought to listen to Japan and Germany. The Germans go on ad nauseam about inflation. That’s all you hear. In Japan, they think it’s nice to have a trade surplus. Low interest rates are not popular in a country with a 20 percent savings rate. Here you attack central bankers for raising interest rates. In Japan, you attack them for not raising interest rates.”

Having led the central banks of the world to a high plateau of punishing interest rates, the Federal Reserve could not now get them to back off. Everyone seemed stuck, unable or unwilling to move away from the high cost of money for their own particular reasons. The allies took cautious steps to lower rates slightly and stimulate, but none was adequate.

Aside from the reluctant allies, the U.S. government could not easily extricate itself from its own contradictions. Given the huge deficits, additional fiscal stimulus was out of the question. Yet the Fed feared that if it stimulated by lowering interest rates, capital might flee from U.S. investments, the dollar’s value might fall precipitously and the central bankers would lose control of prices. Unless everyone acted together, each party was afraid to act alone.

Faster economic growth would mean higher employment and rising real wages for labor—new buyers for the world’s goods—but this time, wages must be driven up worldwide, not just in the United States. At the same time, governments would have to encourage a broader distribution of incomes, the opposite of their economic policies in the eighties, when both tax policy and monetary policy pushed more and more income to the top. The much-celebrated tax reform legislation enacted in 1986 did nothing to reverse the maldistribution of incomes and even exacerbated the imbalance by collapsing the ladder of progressive income-tax rates.

Finally, demand would be stimulated worldwide by refinancing or writing off bad debts—particularly for the Third World nations. Relieving debtors was a way of creating viable consumers. Various proposals to accomplish relief for Latin debtors were beginning to get more serious attention in Congress, but the political obstacles were formidable, including the objections from debtors at home who would demand similar treatment for themselves. Forgiveness, so valued as a human capacity, was always difficult in politics and nearly impossible in economics.

On the supply side, however, the situation was even more difficult because there was no existing political mechanism for dealing with excess capacity and surpluses on an international scale. The only weapon available to governments was to erect individual trade barriers and shield their own markets from the worldwide gluts. In time, the problem of surplus would be resolved by the raw economic forces— the gradual liquidation of producers, whether farms or factories, American or foreign, until the excess capacity was eliminated and world supply came back into balance with the existing demand. The free-market orthodoxy accepted this destruction as the natural process of adjustment.

The political question was whether governments, acting in concert, could devise a less brutal and wasteful means of mediating the surplus among nations—in effect, sharing the burden in order to reduce the pain and disorder. In the 1930s, the New Deal had created a series of supply-control systems for agriculture, oil, labor and other sectors, which worked effectively in the domestic economy for at least a generation. But there was no equivalent vision of how to cope with excess supply on a worldwide scale in the 1980s. Without that thinking, the only plausible solution for politicians was to close their markets to foreign competitors and let someone else’s producers swallow the surplus. As long as the world’s supply glut threatened, the emerging trade war would likely intensify. As long as supply remained out of balance with demand, the liquidations must continue.

In the present political context, these were forbidden questions. The politics of the eighties celebrated the virtues of free-market forces; activist intervention by governments was scorned. At the Federal Reserve and the White House, policy makers were ruled by conservative orthodoxies that did not allow for such possibilities. The Fed felt encouraged by falling wages and a subdued economy and took these to be evidence of necessary adjustments. Volcker and his colleagues were tolerant of the continuing liquidations, which they believed to be the inescapable cost of restoring order. At the White House, President Reagan and his conservative advisers thought that they had buried Keynes. They were not about to revive his ideas and elaborate on them. Just as in earlier eras, the reigning orthodoxy drifted confidently toward its moment in history—the moment when it too would be repudiated by reality.

“It’s a delicious moment of history,” the chief economist at E. F. Hutton declared.13 His exuberance was shared all along Wall Street as both the stock market and the bond market rallied explosively in February 1986, breaking through to historic highs. Everything seemed to be coming together—falling prices, declining interest rates, financial rallies, brighter economic prospects—as if Paul Volcker had planned it that way. The markets were giddy with profit.

Oil prices, after months of predictions, finally did collapse—falling . from $26 a barrel to $12 in a few short weeks at the end of 1985. At about the same time, Congress enacted the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings legislation, promising to reduce the federal deficits to zero within five years. The measure was actually nothing more than a declaration of intent, but it cheered investors obsessed with the fear of eventual inflation.

The moment did seem to be a decisive break in the psychology of the financial markets. The stock market, which had been moving upward steadily since the previous May, suddenly took off in almost daily leaps upward. The Dow Jones index rose above 1760—a gain of 500 points in less than nine months. As the rally continued, less spectacularly, the Dow was pushed eventually above 1900.

The significant rally, however, was in the bond market. Bondholders, presumably heartened by the falling oil prices and the congressional promises of deficit reduction, began to accept lower interest rates on long-term paper and to bid up the trading prices for outstanding issues. Bond yields fell to their lowest level since 1978 and bond prices soared proportionately. The interest rate on twenty-year Treasuries declined by more than 2.5 percent over four months, falling below double digits, down to nearly 8 percent. The inflationary fears of the bond market were clearly subsiding at last—exactly what Volcker had been hoping for.

It’s psychology [the chairman observed]. Just in the last three months, there has been quite a rally in the bond market for not any obvious reason. The economy wasn’t too strong, it’s true, but that didn’t explain it. Why did the bond market rally? I would interpret this as one stone crumbling in the edifice of inflationary psychology. It didn’t disappear but it began to crumble a bit. The reduced rate of inflation has gone on long enough that they began to be believers.

The euphoria of Wall Street investors infected economic forecasters and the good news was swiftly broadcast: the American economy was on the brink of energetic revival, thanks to the twin bonuses of lower oil prices and lower interest rates. In his State of the Union address, President Reagan hailed the “American miracle.” The New York Times announced the dawning of a new era: an unlimited vista of inflation-free prosperity ahead, unlike anything living Americans had experienced.

The elation was short-lived. Within a few weeks, it became apparent that the supposed benefits of lower oil prices were more than offset by the immediate economic damage they caused—soaring unemployment in the Southwest, a new wave of defaults and threatened banks, renewed crisis for Mexico and other debtor nations that depended on the energy sector. The economy did not take off in the spring, as so many had predicted. It slowed down again to an anemic growth rate of .6 percent.

In fact, a new crisis of debt default was spreading through the economy. The consolidation of ownership that had been rolling up the defaulted producers of real goods was now claiming more victims in finance too. The troubled Bank of America fought off take-over bids. More than 120 banks failed, a modern record. Congress rushed to bail out the depleted insurance fund for bankrupt S & L’s and the insolvent federal farm credit system. In Oklahoma, a major bank was “bailed out” by federal regulators before it failed—infused with new capital to forestall collapse. In Houston, the Texas Commerce Bank, twenty-eighth largest in the nation, succumbed to weakness and was acquired by Chemical Bank of New York, the sixth largest. In the deep tides of capitalism, new wealth was widely dispersed on the upside, distributed to new owners in developing regions. Then on the downside some of it was taken back, reconcentrated among the owners of old wealth.

Among other things, the bond market’s spontaneous rally seemed to contradict an argument that Volcker and others had promoted since 1981 and that most politicians had come to believe, namely, that the high level of long-term interest rates prevailing through the eighties was the direct function of the swollen federal deficits. Rates were high, it was said, because the huge government borrowing put too much pressure on credit markets—excessive demand chasing limited supply. If that was so, then why were the long-term rates suddenly falling now? The federal deficit was not getting smaller, it was growing larger. In 1986, it would set another new record, $230 billion. The only thing that had changed was the congressional promise to do something substantial about the deficits—next year or the year after (a promise Congress failed to keep). It was not primarily conditions of supply and demand that had held interest rates high. It was a state of mind in the world of finance—the fears of the bondholders, anxious to protect their profits, and the timidity of the Federal Reserve, unwilling to contradict them.

When the psychology did change at last, the reasons were not especially mysterious. Financial investors had tangible cause to feel better about the future. Their inflationary fears were subsiding because, in fact, the selective deflation was simultaneously growing much worse. The plunge in prices for oil and other commodities drove the Consumer Price Index downward toward zero. For the first time in nearly forty years, the average price level actually turned negative —prices falling at a rate of —2.8 percent over three months.

For the owners of financial wealth, this represented a great windfall, regardless of what it did to the real economy. When prices fell for real goods, anyone holding dollars or dollar-denominated financial assets automatically enjoyed the greater purchasing power. The same money would buy more oil or more farmland. The real value of financial assets was magnified by the falling prices. Investors felt more secure about their wealth because the power of their wealth was growing—almost magically.

The ebullient forecasts for the real economy missed this essential point: the owners of financial wealth did not really give up anything when they consented to the decline in nominal interest rates—and borrowers in the real economy did not gain much either. Nominal interest rates fell swiftly, but so did the inflation rate. The real interest rates, therefore, either remained unchanged or actually increased substantially. The yields on long-term Treasury bonds, for instance, declined roughly in step with the falling price level. But the real return on short-term financial assets actually increased since short-term interest rates declined less than prices did. While the inflation rate was falling by nearly 3 percent, interest on one-year Treasury notes declined by only 1.25 percent. The difference meant lenders were actually collecting even higher real interest rates—and borrowers were paying more.

A booming economy was not a likely prospect if the real cost of money was going up. Consumers, home buyers, even businessmen, did feel momentarily cheered as they watched nominal interest rates decline, but the illusion did not erase the facts of the case. The real burden of borrowing was increased for the struggling economy. The simple equation of real interest rates, so little understood outside finance, was combined with the depressing effects of deflation. Together, they guaranteed that a new era could not unfold, despite Wall Street’s optimism.

The shunned minority on the Federal Reserve Board finally became the majority. When Lyle Gramley and Charles Partee retired, the President appointed two more governors who shared the perspective of Martha Seger and Preston Martin, the original Reagan appointees. Manuel Johnson, Assistant Secretary of the Treasury and a former economics professor from George Mason University, was a supply sider, confident that faster growth was possible without reviving inflation. Wayne Angell was a Kansas banker and wheat farmer, who called himself a “hard-money Populist.” Like the supply siders, Angell argued that the Fed’s decisions should be guided by commodity prices—if oil and grain were caught in deflation, as they were, that meant money was too tight and interest rates must be reduced.

The Federal Reserve chairman, who had failed to have his way on only a few occasions in nearly seven years, was now outnumbered on the Board of Governors. Only Henry Wallich, who was recuperating from chemotherapy treatments, and Emmett Rice, who also intended to retire, remained as Volcker’s committed allies. The “one-man show,” as Martha Seger called it, was about to be disrupted.

Volcker, nonetheless, was even more intransigent. The falling prices and swiftly declining interest rates in the bond market gave the Fed an ideal opportunity to lower short-term rates proportionately. In these circumstances, no one could accuse the chairman of retreating. He would simply be ratifying what the bond market had already decreed. The conditions were ideal for easing money.

Yet the chairman refused to move. He was as stubborn about lowering interest rates as Ronald Reagan was about raising taxes. Volcker insisted on easing short rates only slightly while the long-term rates fell dramatically and the Consumer Price Index dropped below zero— a general deflation. Over four months, long-term bonds had fallen by more than 250 basis points, yet the Fed allowed the Federal Funds rate to decline by only 50 basis points. Given the zero inflation, the effect was to raise the real cost of money—adding to the drag on the weakening economy.

Volcker’s rationale reflected his cautious conservatism, his constant fears of what might happen if he yielded. Interest rates were the Fed’s single lever of control, and after holding the lever taut for six and a half years, the chairman seemed loath to relax it. This time, he worried, if U.S. interest rates relaxed too much, the flow of international capital might turn away and seek higher returns elsewhere. The value of the dollar might fall swiftly in that event—followed by a surge of domestic price inflation as the terms of trade were suddenly reversed. Volcker argued that the United States could not lower its interest rates unless Japan and West Germany were willing to lower their rates simultaneously.

“Nobody else was ready to move,” Volcker said. “My colleagues from the other central banks weren’t ready to move and I had no interest in moving without them. I didn’t like the implications for the dollar, the interpretations that might be put on it. I was concerned about a slide in the dollar that had already gone too far. The interpretation might be: where’s the dollar going to go?”

But Volcker was caught unaware by the intense concerns of his new colleagues on the board. The world’s economy was ebbing, and if the Fed did not act quickly to stimulate, deflation and high interest rates could smother the weak expansion. The argument came to a boil at the Board of Governors meeting on February 24. The four Reagan appointees urged a cut in the Discount rate; Volcker and his two allies were opposed. When the roll was called, the chairman did not back off and neither did the other side. Volcker lost the vote, 4-3, his first recorded defeat as Fed chairman. When the news was announced, it would be obvious he had lost control of the Federal Reserve Board.

“I didn’t want an argument with the chairman,” Preston Martin insisted, “but I didn’t have a choice. I thought I could get him to vote with us. I expected him to come along. I was as surprised as anyone when he wouldn’t do that and he wound up in the minority.”

“I couldn’t change,” Volcker said. “I didn’t have a choice. It was quite apparent that I was going to be in the minority if the majority held to their position. Sometimes, you don’t feel that strongly. Sometimes, you do.”

Volcker was furious afterward. He talked about resigning immediately. He was the chairman, the man responsible for policy, and the institution could not function otherwise. If the other governors were going to take things into their own hands, maybe they should find someone else to lead them. From the boardroom, still upset, Volcker went to a scheduled luncheon with Treasury Secretary James Baker and expressed his feelings.

The Treasury Secretary discreetly intervened, counseling compromise. The abrupt resignation of Paul Volcker would be a destabilizing event in itself, one the Reagan Administration did not need. In the afternoon, the governors reconvened and agreed to a truce: the Discount reduction would be postponed for two weeks while Volcker tried to persuade the West German and Japanese central banks to take similar action. Volcker would remain as chairman. All of them would try to avoid another embarrassing confrontation in the future.

The episode made visible, for one brief moment, the internal conflict that had long divided the Fed. Whatever satisfaction some governors felt at finally prevailing over Paul Volcker, they were also chastened by the controversy. Martin, whose term as vice chairman was expiring, was accused of usurping power. He left the board shortly afterward when the White House would not promise to appoint him as chairman in 1987, when Volcker’s term ended. Manuel Johnson became the new vice chairman and worked on establishing a more settled atmosphere. Volcker patched up his relationships with the new governors, mindful that, if they wished, they could outvote him.

Volcker was still chairman and yet he was no longer chairman in the sense he had been for almost seven years. Instead of being the dominating authority, he was now compelled to be more collegial. Instead of the “System men” who had surrounded him at the board table, arguing if anything that he must be still tougher, he now faced colleagues who were outsiders—less in awe of the institution’s folklore and also decidedly different in their perspective on the political economy. By 1987, Henry Wallich and Emmett Rice retired too, replaced by two more Reagan appointees. Robert Heller was an economist, a senior vice president at the Bank of America who shared Wayne An-gell’s views about pegging monetary policy to the rise and fall of commodity prices. The other was Edward Kelley, an investment counselor from Houston who was a lifelong personal friend of Treasury Secretary James A. Baker.

Now Volcker was all alone. As everyone understood, he was the last “hawk” left at the table. The others did not embarrass him publically again. There were no visible conflicts. But every other member of the Federal Reserve Board held a more generous opinion on the prospects for faster economic growth than the chairman did. His power to control things was ebbing.

The rebellion did succeed in turning Volcker a bit, and, in the aftermath, it was clear that the new governors had been correct in their economic analysis. Real interest rates were too high and going higher. The sluggish economy needed relief from the Fed. If it didn’t come soon, the Federal Reserve might induce another economic contraction—the third one in six years—only this time the recession would be inadvertent.

The episode also illustrated, once again, how the democratic political process was deformed by the existence of this separate power center, immune to direct control. The President’s men were confined to oblique nudges in order to get their way. And, when they succeeded marginally, the press then accused them of violating the sanctity of the central bank. Congress, instead of confronting the central issues of money and interest rates, plunged into subsidiary debates about trade rules and protective tariffs. Democrats were trapped by their past and Republicans by their accomplishments. Neither party could speak directly to the new inequities created by stable money. Neither party dared to challenge the taboo that protected the Federal Reserve.

The political deformity was deeper than the governing relationships of Washington. Citizens at large did not understand their own interests in the politics of money or how their elected representatives failed to speak for those interests. The money debate hardly existed in American politics, and where it did, the terms were usually defined by ignorance and misguided prejudice, by numbing discussions of rival economic theories.

One interest group, almost alone, understood its place in the debate —the bondholders, the commercial bankers, the 400,000 financial professionals of Wall Street and their customers, the investors. They were like an ever-present chorus, scolding the Fed or applauding it, demanding that their interests be served by the government before all others. Like any interest group, their opinions were based on narrow values and were often mistaken, but the consequences of Wall Street’s wrong judgments and the Fed’s flowed into the lives of virtually everyone. The gross distortion of influence would endure so long as neither political party had the presence or courage to challenge it.

The Federal Reserve Board, without further dissent from the chairman, granted three additional Discount reductions in subsequent months of 1986 and nominal interest rates continued downward. Yet the economy still responded fitfully. Real rates were decreasing too, but still remained far above historical levels. The economic impact was obvious, for instance, in mortgage interest rates, which hovered near 10 percent. The lower rate looked inviting to home buyers, but it really wasn’t. Twenty years before, when the inflation rate had also been about 1 percent, mortgage rates were between 4 and 5 percent. The real cost of a home mortgage thus remained exorbitant—and lenders were still collecting a huge extra tariff.

Given the Fed’s actions, the Discount rate was down to 5.5 percent —the lowest nominal rate in ten years. But the Discount rate was still too high in real terms. To provide genuine stimulus for the economy, some analysts figured the Discount rate would have to go as low as 3 percent. Money was somewhat easier, but it was still punishingly dear. The unanswered question for the makers of monetary policy would be: did they yield too little, too late?

When Charles Partee retired from the Federal Reserve System, in early 1986, he was frankly disillusioned about the presumed certitudes of economics.

As someone who’s been doing this for thirty-five years, it’s a very humbling experience [Partee said]. I can’t maintain any theory. All I can say is that I have a pretty good sense of the economy. That’s all. Nothing ennobling to teach. Nothing to state as a grand principle. Any economist who’s going to be honest ought to say just the same thing. Lyle Gramley ought to say the same thing. To tell you the truth, Paul Volcker ought to say the same thing.

The Federal Reserve chairman did, in fact, express his own sense of quandary. Why was there such tremendous creation of new debt when interest rates were so high? Why didn’t the productivity of the economy improve now that inflation was gone? How was the financial system going to work its way out of the mountain of questionable debt obligations? The eighties, he agreed, did have parallels with the twenties.

The giddy behavior in financial markets and inflated stock prices were the most obvious resemblances. The dangerous expansion of domestic debt and the international disequilibrium were similar too. Benjamin Strong spent the decade of the 1920s trying to patch the international gold standard back together (and failed spectacularly with the collapse of 1929). Paul Volcker spent the 1980s coping with the currency instability too and trying to keep the international finance system from breaking down. Volcker did not sit around making the-crash-is-coming comparisons with the past. He worried about the dangers of the present.

Volcker’s dilemma resembled Benjamin Strong’s in a more precise manner. In the summer of 1928, Strong had executed a huge infusion of new liquidity into the banking system, hoping to help European financial markets and to avert a domestic recession. Strong’s action, in hindsight, was blamed for bringing on the collapse. Instead of real growth, the excess liquidity flowed into financial speculation, fueling the hectic price run-up on Wall Street that ended abruptly in the Great Crash.

Something similar occurred, starting in the summer of 1985, when the Fed reluctantly allowed money growth to soar. Since the real economy offered such poor prospects, the excess money supply found its way into financial markets, driving up paper prices and allowing Wall Street’s great rally. If Volcker acquiesced to the money growth, it simply stimulated financial excess. But if he refused, he might drive the real economy into recession, collapsing debtors and their banks.

With rapid money growth, the financial markets surged for more than two years while the real economy languished, approximately the same divergence that occurred in the late twenties. Stock prices were uncoupled from real value. The resemblance of events was eerily reflected in the Dow Jones index: its upward course in the eighties, as it moved past 2600, was in nearly perfect step with the chart the Dow followed during the fateful bull market of the late twenties.

Even in the best of times, melodramatic scenarios for economic disaster were commonplace and usually fatuous. None had ever come to pass, at least not since 1929. History did not usually repeat itself so neatly. The economy had, nevertheless, developed many of the same vulnerabilities that had led to 1929—in particular, “bubbles” of bad debt that seemed unsustainable. Vacant office buildings were erected with borrowed money, based on occupancy assumptions that could not be fulfilled. Corporate restructurings were financed with “junk bonds” on dubious projections of future profits. If ill-founded hopes were suddenly shattered, the loans behind them might collapse too. Investors would rush to dump the stock shares they owned and financial values would plunge. The bubbles would burst.

In some respects, the underlying conditions of the 1980s were actually less promising. The decade of the twenties, for instance, was an era of enormous expansion in America’s industrial base and the capital investment produced extraordinary gains in productivity. During the eighties, both capital formation and productivity improvement were weak. The economy in the twenties also accumulated unsustainable debts, but the borrowing did not include massive deficit spending by the federal government. The present vulnerabilities, in short, rested on a much weaker base.

Charles Partee did not actually subscribe to the disaster scenarios, but in his quandary, he found himself taking them more seriously. Partee laughed nervously at the oddity of it—a retiring Federal Reserve governor, clearing out his office while he speculated on how the next financial collapse might unfold.

Hell, I’ve got some guy who comes around every six months and tells me about the long cycle and the crash that’s coming [Partee said]. I think, well, he’s a real oddball. And then I think, well, everything is running on course, just as he told me. First, he says, real estate would crash. Then that would undercut other values, and debt, which is still very high, becomes more risky. This causes a general flight to liquidity—investors getting out of financial instruments—and that would bring down the stock market. I ask him when. He says it might be 1987, but more likely 1989.

Conventional opinion, at least since the 1930s, was comforted by the assumption that governments would never allow such a catastrophe to occur again. The Federal Reserve and other central banks could reverse the event by “flooding the street with money,” as Benjamin Strong had said. But that required a willingness to forsake principle and consciously destabilize money. The Fed’s failure to act after 1929 was not essentially technical weakness. It was the inability of the governors to understand what was happening, an unwillingness to intervene against what seemed to them natural developments. Would the modern Fed be more perceptive, more willing to act in time? It required decisiveness, even courage, for a central banker to abandon money in order to save the real economy. Charles Partee, for one, was not altogether confident.

“These situations, as they became critical, would force the decision —whether or not to throw money at them,” Partee explained. “Do we bring back inflation to prevent these things from happening? Of course, if there was a general collapse, that would be way beyond the scale that open-market operations could deal with.”

Partee reassured himself, however, with the knowledge that the economy and the banking system had weathered repeated crises in the recent past, and the gloomy predictions always had been avoided. The Fed would have to muddle through, as Volcker said, patching up weak spots, bailing out the bankrupt banks too large to fail, hoping that, over time, the economy would grow out of its troubles.

“Pm reminded that things looked pretty bad a year or two ago,” Partee said. “The banking system was overextended. People were saying the Texas banks were going to go because of oil. West Coast banks have a lot of real-estate loans. New York banks are in way over their heads. Actually, some considerable period of time has gone by and nothing much has happened.”

If the historical parallel with the 1920s held true, however, the collapse might not begin in New York or Texas or California, but in Tokyo. Sixty years ago, when the Great Crash developed, the United States was the ascendant new economic power, trying to prop up the enfeebled older power, Great Britain, which could no longer lead. Something similar was occurring in the late 1980s, only now Japan was the rising power and it was the United States that was losing strength and becoming dependent. Under pressure to help the United States, Japan had lowered rates and pumped up its domestic liquidity. But, just as had happened on Wall Street in 1928 and 1929, Japan’s enlarged money supply flowed heavily into financial speculation and drove up prices on the Tokyo stock exchange.

In any case, the gap between economic reality and financial illusion was already sufficiently visible in Wall Street. From 1982 to 1987, the value of Dow-Jones stocks had inflated by more than 230 percent. Yet real economic growth had totaled only 20 percent. Industrial production had increased by only 25 percent. Someone was terribly wrong about economic conditions. In the modern financial world, it hardly mattered who crashed first—New York or Tokyo—because the others were sure to follow.

The potential for a modern collapse involved one other underlying vulnerability—the same one Marriner Eccles had identified more than fifty years ago when he tried to figure out what caused the Great Depression. The economy was being steadily weakened by what Ec-cles called the “giant suction pump” of maldistribution—economic policies that pulled more and more income away from those who would spend it, pushing millions of families toward the point where they could not consume.

As mass production has to be accompanied by mass consumption, mass consumption, in turn, implies a distribution of wealth—not of existing wealth, but of wealth as it is currently produced—to provide men with buying power. . . . Instead of achieving that kind of distribution, a giant suction pump had by 1929-30 drawn into a few hands an increasing portion of currently produced wealth. ... As in a poker game where the chips are concentrated in fewer and fewer hands, the other fellows could stay in the game only by borrowing. When their credit ran out, the game stopped.14

The same process was at work. Consumption remained strong because more and more families relied on debt rather than earnings. Personal savings fell to unprecedented levels, as low as 2 percent of current income, and consumer debt levels rose as high as 18 percent. But these averages were misleading because the rising debt burdens were concentrated, naturally enough, on the bottom half of the economic ladder—the families whose income shares had shrunk in the 1980s. In effect, they were borrowing from the upper half in order to keep buying, the debtors relying on the creditors to stay in the game. It was just as well that they did. With business investment dwindling, consumer spending was the principal economic activity keeping the economic expansion alive.

If consumers were eventually forced to pull back, if enough families reached the point where they could borrow no more chips, then the poker game must stop. Recession would follow and all the debt-weakened families and businesses would be at severe risk. When would this occur? The few economic forecasters who were alarmed could not say precisely when. All they could observe with certainty was that the deterioration was under way, and if nothing intervened to reverse it, the game would eventually end.

The surest way to prevent that outcome would be to turn off the “suction pump”—to push more income downward in the society to the debtor families, those who would promptly spend it. Through the tax code, through lower interest rates or through direct aid, the government could prolong and reinvigorate the prosperity by reversing the maldistribution of incomes that had dominated the 1980s. Neither Congress nor the President nor the Federal Reserve, neither Republican nor Democrat, was inclined to embrace this remedy. The idea of progressive distribution of incomes was as passe in the “go-go eighties” as it had been in the “roaring twenties.” Old lessons, learned so painfully in past crises, were now forgotten.

Certain principles of money were not subject to alteration by the modern technocratic managers. They might be ignored or forgotten for a time, but they could not be repealed. One of these principles was the ancient biblical injunction against usury. The particular definitions of usury had changed over the centuries, but the moral meaning had not. Usury was present when lenders insisted on terms that were sure to ruin the borrowers.

Like most moral principles, the sin of usury was grounded in practical necessity. It was more than a social plea for fairness or generosity on the part of the wealthy. No social system could tolerate usury, not as a permanent condition, because it led to an economic life that was self-devouring. The rentier collected his due until he owned all the property and the peasants had nothing. But who would buy the rentier s grain if he had all the money? And how would the peasants survive?

Modern capitalism, less obviously, was subject to the same pathology. The miracle of compound interest, celebrated for its power to stimulate new ventures and generate new wealth, contained a malevolent potential. The process could not function indefinitely if the creditors got most all of the rewards—the new wealth that was derived from their lending—and the enterprising borrowers got little or none. Interest rates set the terms on which the rewards of capitalism would be divided and interest was usurious when the borrower’s rightful share of profit was confiscated by the lender.

Capitalism could not long function in that condition. The creative powers of capital were reversed and the compounding interest became destructive. Instead of distributing the bounty widely, the rewards were steadily concentrated in fewer and fewer hands. The process might go on for quite a long time, but eventually it had to fail, either from social upheaval or economic exhaustion.

Did the Federal Reserve and cooperating forces impose conditions in the decade of the eighties that were a modern equivalent of usury? The question provided a larger context for judging what had transpired. As the decade opened, the legal limits on interest were repealed and the normal political inhibitions were set aside. Lenders would be allowed to collect unlimited rewards, whatever the market dictated. What followed was an era in which the shares were radically redivided. The government itself fostered the redistribution by holding interest rates at unprecedented levels. Creditors received a bloated share. Borrowers accepted terms that, for many, guaranteed their ruin. Like the sixteenth-century French peasants who turned to the usurer, many borrowers did not have much choice. They were ruined anyway if they refused the terms.

“We should not be surprised,” economist Kenneth E. Boulding observed, “if the economy is exhibiting some pathological features. . . . If monetary policy causes interest to erode away profit, it creates a bleak future for capitalism.”15 As recently as 1960, net interest was less than 3 percent of the total national income that went to corporations and individuals. In the 1980s, interest claimed 10 or 11 percent of the national income, a severe change in the division of rewards. A larger share for the rentier was perhaps justifiable when inflation was alive, depreciating the value of their money. When inflation stopped, however, the terms became scandalous.

Iowa farmers who complained about usury and the Fed were not wrong about their own predicament. Farmers who borrowed money to plant crops, knowing their returns could not possibly cover the interest due, were indeed victims of usurious terms, even if no one else called them that. Sooner or later, if the farmers continued to borrow, the lenders would own their farms. Home buyers, who entered mortgage transactions they could not possibly sustain, could be described as victims too.

For other kinds of enterprises and the economy in general, the question of usury was more difficult to answer. What was obvious was that, throughout the 1980s, creditors collected the greatest returns of this century, whether their wealth was lent to the government or through corporate bonds or bank loans or short-term financial paper. Most individual borrowers seemed able, at least in the short run, to keep up with the swollen interest burdens and retain a share for themselves, albeit a smaller one than they once received. Many of them, however, were like the farmers—falling steadily behind. So too was the economy as a whole.

If this did constitute usury, the ruinous effects for capitalism would not be fully visible immediately. The pathology would be steady and silent, sapping the vigor of the process until one day, perhaps quite dramatically, the underlying malady made itself known. The persuasive evidence suggesting this condition was the level of real interest rates compared to the real growth of the overall economy. In every quarter since 1980, except three, real interest rates had exceeded the real economic growth. That was another way of saying that the share for the creditor was compounding faster than the economy could produce the new wealth to be divided. “It’s political dynamite,” Lyle Gramley had observed. “Sooner or later,” Preston Martin agreed, “it will sink the ship.”

Capitalism had this flaw: there was no natural stop valve to control its appetites. For individuals as well as for great institutions of finance, the natural ambition of capital was always to seek maximum return from wealth. There was nothing in the capitalist process that told investors when they were demanding too much from it, that their collective desire for net gain was undermining the system itself. In the absence of political or social controls, the decrees of church or government, the lenders naturally claimed as much as the marketplace would allow; they had no way to distinguish between their normal desire for profit and the destructiveness of greed. If government endorsed the free rein of the rentier, as it had, if politicians removed legal restraints on interest and the regulators of money supported the demands of bondholders, then nothing stood in the way of capital’s sinful impulses.

1

feel sorry for him [said Charles Partee]. He’s an old man now. He spent his life on this theory. Now it’s destroyed. The decision to let money go and try to have enough stimulus to keep the economy going pretty much finishes the monetary aggregates. This is the second time we’ve had to do that and it proved right both times. The aggregates can never again be a

2

talked to him before I left and he was really agonizing, really between a rock and a hard place. All these debts, all these huge deficits, so late in





Paul Volcker towered above the pedestrian ranks of politicians and public servants. His stern brilliance intimidated them and his strong-willed expertise outflanked them. Like all mortals, Volcker was fallible but his errors were barely noticed. The Federal Reserve chairman, the men and women of his institution, had accomplished the great goal they had set for themselves in 1979. Indeed, they had achieved much more than most people, including themselves, had thought possible. In a relatively few years and despite an expansionary fiscal policy, the decision makers of the Federal Reserve had brought the rate of price inflation from 13 percent to the practical equivalent of zero. It was a great victory.

The triumph was hollow, however, for the nation. Its moral promises to the victims were not kept. For the entire society, its predicted benefits were not realized. Paul Volcker and the central bank had taken the country and nations around the world through great suffering—the long contraction and its human tragedies, massive failures, dislocated lives, the pain of the continuing liquidation and the losses of deflation. The moral justification offered throughout was that the pain would be worth it. From bankrupt home builders to displaced factory workers, people were told that their sacrifices were necessary to the general good that would come from them. That conviction sustained Volcker and his colleagues as they had to make the nasty decisions and it reassured public opinion too. On the other side of the temporary suffering, the economy would emerge stronger and more stable, better prepared for a long-running prosperity in which all could share the benefits, if they were willing workers.

This moral promise, in the end, could not be kept. The suffering and dislocation, for one thing, proved to be continuing, not temporary. Furthermore, the sacrifices did not lead to anything resembling what the victims had been told to expect. Once money was stabilized, the economy still faced the same underlying problems it had encountered in the era of inflation—only they were now more severe.

Even in terms of Paul Volcker’s own stated goals for the economy, the original hopes were mostly disappointed. Starting in 1979, Volcker had regularly predicted that curbing inflation would revive long-term investment in the American economy. The improved climate for capital formation, he said, would lead to greater growth in productivity, the key to larger income shares for everyone in the future. Abroad, the restored value of the dollar would bring stability to the international financial system. Volcker told wage earners that, without inflation, their nominal pay increases would be smaller, but their real wage gains would prove to be larger. He assured Congress that, while interest rates would be higher at first, in the long run interest rates would be lower. None of those objectives was fulfilled. In nearly every instance, something like the opposite occurred.

Volcker did not disagree entirely with that assessment. His original expectations had been thrown askew, he said, by the unforeseen complication of huge federal deficits. Progress toward his original goals— restored long-term investment, greater productivity, international stability, low real interest rates, rising real wages—was taking longer than he had thought it would. The process involved more risks.

“In the gross terms of the recovery of the economy and on inflation, I suppose it’s sort of on track,” Volcker said. “But the uncertainties are greater than I would have expected. Maybe it was naive not to expect that. The economic progress looks on track but the surrounding music is not so good.”

In fact, the deeper trend lines for the economy did not look “on track” either—at least not toward the brighter future that Volcker had described. By every meaningful indicator, America’s economic performance continued to decline in the decade of the 1980s, notwithstanding the President’s claims for it or Volcker’s predictions. In truth, the 1980s fell far short of what the economy had accomplished in the inflationary 1970s, an era widely described as disappointing. Expansion of economic output in the eighties was roughly one-third less than real economic growth during the previous decade. Real disposable incomes grew more slowly and so did the creation of new jobs. Productivity gains, already weak and troubling in the seventies, were slightly worse in the eighties. Unemployment was persistently higher than ever before. The proportion of citizens living in poverty increased accordingly.

There was only one exception to this bleak picture: prices. Price inflation was gone. The claim that this change would unleash positive forces in economic performance was simply not confirmed by reality. Volcker continued to believe that, given time and the gradual eradication of the various weaknesses, stable money would deliver what he had promised. In the meantime, certain people would have to settle for less. It would be good for them.

Disinterested observers could look at the facts and reach a gloomier conclusion: whatever was fundamentally wrong with the U.S. economy, it had not been fixed—not by Ronald Reagan’s supply-side economics and not by Paul Volcker’s “hard money.” In many ways, these policies had compounded the underlying ailments. The long-term trend line for the American economy was more ominous now than it had been in the 1970s. From the sixties onward, each succeeding decade produced slower growth, higher levels of permanent unemployment and declining real wages, less progress on capital formation and productivity. For many years, all these portentous developments had been blamed on inflation. Now that inflation was gone, it was obvious that something else was responsible, deeper problems in the aging economic structure that remained unattended.

The public was told—and evidently believed—that Paul Volcker and the Federal Reserve had saved the American economy. In truth, the economy was led into greater weakness and graver peril. In fact, altogether, the government in Washington had done great damage to the citizens at large and to economic enterprise in general. Yet the government evaded the moral question that arose from its actions. If the economy was not healthier, if the supposed benefits of stable money had not been realized, then what would the government say to all those people who had been sacrificed?

Despite popular mythology, the Federal Reserve chairman was no longer as powerful as everyone believed, no longer even fully in charge at the Federal Reserve Board. His weakened status became evident to insiders in the early spring of 1987, when the bondholders experienced another of their momentary anxieties over inflation and began again to bid up interest rates. Oil and agricultural prices were reviving slightly; unemployment was subsiding toward 6 percent as the dollar’s devastation began to moderate. Though the price improvements were modest, Wall Street analysts quickly characterized it as the long-feared resurgence of inflation. Once again, their fears were not confirmed in reality, but interest rates increased anyway. Commercial banks pushed up their prime lending rate for the first time in three years. The Fed nudged the Federal Funds rate upward.

Paul Volcker wanted the Federal Reserve to do more. But the Board of Governors refused. At least twice in April and May, the chairman suggested informally to his colleagues that the Fed ought to be raising its Discount rate, as an expression of solidarity with the financial markets. He persuaded only Governor Wayne Angell. The other three governors appointed by Ronald Reagan declared, rather bluntly, that they would vote down the chairman if he tried it.

Despite Wall Street’s “bull market,” the real economy was struggling. Debt defaults were spreading. Governor Martha Seger visited Oklahoma and Texas and described the miseries she had seen there, the continuing failure induced by falling prices and high interest rates. The country was not threatened by inflation, she insisted. It was still suffering from deflation. And it could not stand higher interest rates.

The chairman did not push the question to a formal vote, since he was certain to lose, and so the private confrontation remained private, unknown to the general public. Inside the government, however, the word was about that Paul Volcker had lost control over the Federal Reserve Board. The austere technocrat who had so thoroughly dominated the politics of the 1980s was, at last, at bay.16

A week or two later, Volcker lost another important dimension of his power, but in a more subtle manner. John S. Reed, the new chairman at Citibank, took the sort of bold, unilateral action that his predecessor, Walter Wriston, had often initiated. Citibank announced that it was posting a huge loan-loss reserve, $3 billion set aside from profits, to cover its bad loans to Latin America. Other major banks swiftly followed with similar moves. On one level, it was an important first step toward facing reality—the banks accepting the fact that much of their LDC lending would never be repaid and eventually must be written off.

On another plane, however, Citibank’s declaration directly outflanked Paul Volcker and undermined his authority as Fed chairman, the crisis manager who had steered the bankers and debtor nations through five years of international debt crisis. Reed and Volcker had quarreled repeatedly in recent months over the easier new terms negotiated for Mexico and other countries. Meanwhile, Brazil suspended interest payments to the banks. Now Citibank was declaring independence from the paternal guidance of the Fed. Henceforth, if necessary, it would go it alone. Armed with its expanded loan-loss reserves, Citibank could stare down the debtor nations’ demands for further concessions and, if they threatened default, perhaps the bank would call their bluff. Citibank, followed by the others, was prepared to play a new kind of “hardball” at the bargaining table and that meant the long-running debt crisis was about to enter a turbulent, new phase. For Paul Volcker, it meant he would no longer be able to dictate the terms.

Given these events and the ominous weaknesses developing in the economy, it seemed like the ideal moment for the chairman to retire. His second four-year term ended in August, and, if he left now, history would remember his triumph. Any subsequent disorders would doubtless be blamed on his successor. Yet, despite personal ambivalence, Volcker was willing to continue as chairman—if the President met certain conditions.

The terms were broadcast informally by the chairman’s friends and associates: the President should deliver a fulsome declaration of support for Volcker’s stewardship. It would serve as a discreet signal to the other governors to follow his leadership. The implication, as one former White House official put it, was: “Volcker wanted the President to give him back his board.”

If so, it was an audacious suggestion and the White House had no interest in making such a commitment. After seven years of enduring Volcker’s stubborn single-mindedness, the President and supporting politicians would be delighted to finally get their own man in charge at the Fed—especially as they headed into the presidential election year of 1988 with a weakened economy.

“This idea that the President is supposed to beg an appointee to serve again is just not right,” an Administration official complained. “Was there some feeling that the President is entitled to his own man? Sure, there was.” The Administration wanted a Fed chairman who would not only collaborate more intimately with the White House but who also was sensitive to the present risks of recession.

The question was how to arrange this transition without being accused by Wall Street of dumping the legendary Paul Volcker. The White House floated reassurances in the press that Volcker would almost certainly be reappointed. Meanwhile, it remained silent on the suggested terms for Volcker’s reappointment. The oblique signals from the Fed continued. The President’s men pretended not to hear them.

On June 2, President Reagan announced, with appropriate regrets, that Paul Volcker had decided to retire. The decision was attributed to the chairman’s personal desire to return to private life. The new chairman would be Alan Greenspan, business consultant and former economics advisor to President Ford, an economist sufficiently conservative to reassure Wall Street. Both the press and the financial markets bought the story.

Alan Greenspan was an orthodox conservative Republican who shared the same perspective as Paul Volcker and was actually more conservative on some questions like bank deregulation. Greenspan had even endorsed, at least in principle, the idea of someday restoring the gold standard. On the crucial question of managing the economy, however, the Reagan White House felt satisfied that the new Federal Reserve chairman would be more accommodating and less stubborn than the old one.

Greenspan had a long association with Republican politics and a reputation as a “pragmatist” who liked to work out a consensus with others. Furthermore, for the past year and a half, he had worried aloud at many public forums about the weakened state of the economy and the need to avert a recession at all costs, while so many debtors were in trouble. Finally, whatever his economic inclinations, Greenspan simply did not have the personal stature of Paul Volcker, either in Washington or Wall Street. Surrounded by independent-minded governors, the new chairman would be unable to dominate the Federal Reserve Board the way Volcker had done through most of his tenure. For that matter, he would be less able to intimidate the politicians.

The Volcker era had ended, but money remained triumphant. The government was not yet prepared to shed the agenda Volcker had imposed on it or to repudiate the narrow definition of economic order that he represented. Afterward, as he confided to friends, Volcker was disappointed that the President did not nominate him for another term. He had wanted to be asked and he wasn’t. Perhaps, at last, the politicians in Washington had succeeded in outmaneuvering the central banker from Wall Street.

Money was a veil, just as economists said, but what it concealed was the deeper political conflict among classes of citizens. The money question was the political expression of a struggle over shares. When economic growth languished, when the economy persistently disappointed expectations, different groups and interests naturally fought over the dwindling returns, over who would hold onto their shares and who must accept less. In a practical sense, that was all that had happened in the 1980s—a political struggle over diminishing shares. And the bondholders had won, the creditors with accumulated wealth. Their capital was replenished and amply compensated for their earlier grievances against inflation. They held the high ground now and would not yield until forced to do so.

For most of 200 years, America had successfully evaded the contradiction between democracy and capitalism. The nation was able to honor both, so long as it managed to maintain the constant of healthy economic growth. If the broad landscape of work and incomes was expanding generously, distributing new rewards broadly, questions of who owned wealth and other disparities seemed irrelevant to the general prosperity. Economic growth, as many politicians understood intuitively, was the safety valve that relieved the tension between wealth and wage earners, the inherent conflict in democratic capitalism.

The American contradiction was joined, however, when the economy failed to grow robustly. Gradually, but inevitably, the disappointed expectations would feed the conflict between classes, as larger and larger groups of people were compelled to accept smaller shares of prosperity or were left out altogether. Many citizens of influence, led by the wealth holders, were quite content with an economy that grew but slowly. Their own lives went forward prosperously, oblivious to the social deterioration that was underway around them. In time, however, if stagnation persisted long enough, they too would find themselves engulfed by the consequences—bitter social divisions and a vengeful politics aimed at wealth itself. The unanswered question posed by the 1980s was whether the United States has already entered into such an era.

Eventually, the political hegemony of money must end. As history had demonstrated again and again, the economic system could not forever endure stable money. Sooner or later, the pendulum must move back in the other direction, either gradually or violently, if people wished to restore a vigorously expanding economy. If financial speculation and the developing vulnerabilities did indeed reach a climactic point of collapse, the shift in political values might be quite sudden. The confident money orthodoxy that had dominated the decade would be smashed in a single illuminating moment, its illusion of stability finally exposed by the deeper fundamentals that had always been present.

On Monday, October 19, 1987, such a moment arrived. For a month and a half, the stock market had retreated fitfully from its peak above 2700 on the Dow-Jones average. The descent was harrowing, as the market lost as much as 108 points in a single day. Still, financial analysts and most investors maintained their confidence. The economy was healthy, they told one another, and the losses were merely a necessary correction, a temporary pause, in the long bull market that had begun its ascent back in 1982.

Then, on October 19, the stock market crashed. The “crowds” of Wall Street abruptly lost faith and stampeded. The Dow-Jones average fell 508 points, and something on the order of $500 billion in financial wealth was lost in a single day of trading. The following day, financial markets in Asia and Europe panicked too and experienced similar debacles. For Americans, the event was a trauma beyond the experience of anyone except the elderly who remembered 1929.

Market commentators and high government officials hurriedly assured the public that, despite resemblances, this would not be the beginning of another Great Crash. The government was now more sophisticated, they insisted, and so were the professionals of finance. The President declared that the economy was fundamentally sound. His comments sounded eerily like the things Herbert Hoover had said in the autumn of 1929.

In fact, the market collapse was an ominous warning. Whether the economy stabilized or descended into a deeper disaster would depend heavily on whether the people in power had the courage to abandon the discredited orthodoxy and pursue more realistic values. If extreme circumstances developed in subsequent months, their choice might resemble the one Governor Charles Partee had ruminated on two years before: Would the Federal Reserve have the will to abandon money’s value in order to save the real economy? The antidote to a general economic collapse was well understood—lower interest rates and rising prices—if the authorities had the nerve to pursue it. For central bankers, it was the hardest choice imaginable—to deliberately debase money in order to save people.

The reinflation of money values would stimulate economic growth but also restore balance and help to heal the wounded. Inflation encouraged the future and, if kept to reasonable proportions, it stimulated general optimism. Rising prices excited what Keynes called the “animal spirits” of businessmen. It gave them the prospect of expanded profit and the courage to plunge forward with new ventures— the “reckless, booming anarchy” that fostered great achievements. The resumption of inflation would mean rising shares for wage earners and an honest return for commodity producers. Rising prices would restore overburdened debtors to solvency, forgiving them their debts by depreciating money. A return to inflation would begin again to discreetly redistribute wealth in a positive direction.

The idea of deliberately destabilizing money was inadmissible. Reviving inflation was beyond discussion. But, perhaps in time, as more people came to understand it, they would demand as the cure what they had been told was the affliction.

Money was like the sacred totem in a primitive culture, a mysterious object that efficiently expressed the larger social reality. In the American culture formed by democratic capitalism, money was the sacred totem. The common faith shared by Americans was secular rationalism and the social order was defined by the scientific abstractions surrounding money. Yet religious mystery was still required—priests and ritual, sacred secrets that sustained belief.

If one understood money’s secrets, the true nature of the American social reality was made plain. Money revealed compromised ideals in the civic order. Limitations were imposed on the idea of democracy and sovereign citizens passively accepted them. Money defined the social hierarchy, the rank ordering of citizens, which valued some above others. Money expressed the culture’s deepest longings and obsessions, the fretful belief that a dead substance could somehow confer immortal life on those who accumulated it. Money was a living creed in American life, as Veblen said, a more convincing reality than human toil or material needs or the tenuous things of the human spirit.

If the secrets of the temple were revealed, the money mystery would dissolve and people would have to look upon these things directly. Taboos uncoded lost their power to persuade. Americans would see the full terms that bound them together as a society, the deals that were made in their name and the harsh rituals. They would stand before the awesome authority to which free citizens deferred. They would know at last what it was they really believed in.

The mystery was necessary, therefore, to sustain social faith. Knowledge was disturbing. Not knowing the secrets was reassuring. If Americans were afraid to look inside the temple, perhaps it was because they feared to see the truth about themselves.





APPENDIX A


The history of U.S. prices from 1800 to 1986—two perspectives. The first chart traces the rise and fall of the general price level and shows the spikes of inflation that accompanied major wars, the great deflation that followed the Civil War, the price collapse after the stock-market crash of 1929 and the long inflationary era that unfolded after World War II. The second chart offers a more realistic perspective on prices because it traces the year-to-year percentage changes in prices over the same period of history. Data are drawn from Historical Statistics of the United States and, after 1929, from the Consumer Price Index of the Bureau of Labor Statistics.





APPENDIX B


Money, Interest Rates and the Economy

The following tables provide an approximate sense of how month-to-month changes in interest rates and money growth interact with the real economy. Monthly changes in growth of the money supply are for the basic aggregate known as M-l. The Federal Funds rate, which applies to overnight lending of excess reserves among commercial banks, is the clearest indicator of Federal Reserve policy because it is the interest rate most reliably controlled by the Fed. The short-term interest rate refers to three-month Treasury bills, a gauge of money-market conditions, and the long-term rate refers to twenty-year Treasury bonds. The inflation rate is the Consumer Price Index for urban population. GNP growth represents the real quarterly growth in the Gross National Product, discounted for inflation. Data are monthly averages from the Annual Statistical Digest of the Federal Reserve Board, the Council of Economic Advisers and the Bureau of Labor Statistics. All interest rates are rounded to the nearest tenth of 1 percent and will not always correspond precisely to the weekly averages used in the text.

1979



Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

June

July

Aug

Sept

Oct

Nov

Dec



Money Supply

.3

2.3

10.7

18.8

-1.3

15.3

112

8.0

73

2.2

4.1

6.9



Fed Funds rate

10.1

10.1

10.1

10.1

10.2

10.3

10.5

10.9

11.4

13.8

13.2

13.8



Short-term rate

9.4

9.3

9.5

9.5

9.6

9.1

9.2

9.5

10.3

11.7

11.8

12.0



Long-term rate

9.0

9.0

9.1

9.1

92

8.9

8.9

9.0

9.2

10.0

10.4

102



Unemployment

5.9

5.9

5.8

5.8

5.6

5.7

5.7

6.0

5.9

6.0

5.9

6.0



Inflation

10.6

14.1

11.6

11.9

14.8

14.0

12.7

12.1

12.5

10.8

11.3

12.6



GNP Growth

3.9

-1.7

4.1

.6



1980



Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

June

July

Aug

Sept

Oct

Nov

Dec



Money Supply

6.8

12.8

-.6

-17.2

.9

11.0

13.4

22.8

14.5

13.1

8.1

-10.0



Fed Funds rate

13.8

14.1

172

17.6

11.0

9.5

9.0

9.6

10.9

12.8

15.9

18.9



Short-term rate

12.0

12.9

152

13.2

8.6

7.1

8.1

9.1

10.3

11.6

13.7

15.5



Long-term rate

10.7

12.2

12.5

11.4

10.4

9.9

10.3

11.1

11.5

11.8

12.4

12.5



Unemployment

6.3

62

6.3

6.9

7.5

7.5

7.8

7.7

7.5

7.5

7.5

7.3



Inflation

16.8

15.6

15.6

10.8

10.8

12.0

12

9.6

12.0

12.0

13.2

12.0



GNP Growth

3.1

-9.9

2.4

3.8



1981



Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

June

July

Aug

Sept

Oct

Nov

Dec



Money Supply

9.8

4.3

14.3

25.2

-11.4

-2.2

2.8

4.8

.3

4.7

9.7

12.4



Fed Funds rate

19.1

15.9

14.7

15.7

18.5

19.1

19.0

17.8

15.9

15.1

13.3

12.4



Short-term rate

15.0

14.8

13.4

13.7

16.3

14.7

15.0

15.5

14.7

13.5

10.9

10.9



Long-term rate

12.3

13.0

12.9

13.5

13.8

13.2

13.9

14.5

15.1

15.1

13.6

13.7



Unemployment

7.5

7.4

7.3

72

7.5

7.4

72

7.4

7.6

8.0

8.3

8.6



Inflation

9.6

12.0

72

4.8

9.6

8.4

13.2

9.6

13.2

4.8

6.0

4.8



GNP Growth

7.9

-1.5

22

-5.3



1982



Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

June

July

Aug

Sept

Oct

Nov

Dec



Money Supply

19.6

.5

1.6

1.9

8.3

2.7

2.7

10.3

12.8

14.3

13.6

10.6



Fed Funds rate

13.2

14.8

14.7

14.9

14.5

14.2

12.6

10.1

10.3

9.7

9.2

9.0



Short-term rate

12.3

13.5

12.7

12.7

12.1

12.5

11.4

8.7

7.9

7.7

8.1

7.9



Long-term rate

14.6

14.5

13.8

13.6

13.5

14.2

13.8

12.9

12.2

11.0

10.6

10.6



Unemployment

8.6

8.8

9.0

9.3

9.4

9.5

9.8

9.9

10.2

10.5

10.7

10.8



Inflation

3.6

2.4

-3.6

2.4

12.0

12.0

72

3.6

2.4

6.0

1.2

-3.6



GNP Growth

-5.9

1.2

-3.2

.6



1983



Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

June

July

Aug

Sept

Oct

Nov

Dec



Money Supply

11.5

14.8

13.0

3.6

21.0

10.2

9.4

5.8

3.5

6.2

3.2

5.3



Fed Funds rate

8.7

8.5

8.8

8.8

8.6

9.0

9.4

9.6

9.5

9.5

9.3

9.5



Short-term rate

7.9

8.1

8.4

8.2

8.2

8.8

9.1

9.3

9.0

8.6

8.8

9.0



Long-term rate

10.8

11.0

10.8

10.6

10.7

11.1

11.6

12.0

11.8

11.8

11.9

12.0



Unemployment

10.4

10.4

10.3

102

10.1

10.0

9.5

9.5

9.2

8.8

8.4

8.2



Inflation

2.4

0

1.2

8.4

6.0

3.6

4.8

3.6

6.0

3.6

2.4

1.2



GNP Growth

3.5

9.3

6.0

7.3



1984



Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

June

July

Aug

Sept

Oct

Nov

Dec



Money Supply

7.6

6.4

7.0

4.3

7.2

10.7

-.9

4.3

5.7

-6.9

11.9

102



Fed Funds rate

9.6

9.6

9.9

10.3

10.3

11.1

11.2

11.7

11.3

10.0

9.4

8.4



Short-term rate

8.9

9.1

9.5

9.7

9.8

9.9

10.1

10.5

10.4

9.7

8.6

8.1



Long-term rate

11.8

120

12.5

12.7

13.4

13.5

13.4

12.7

12.4

12.0

11.7

11.7



Unemployment

8.0

7.8

7.8

7.8

7.5

72

7.5

7.5

7.4

7.3

7.1

7.2



Inflation

7.2

6.0

2.4

6.0

3.6

3.6

3.6

4.8

6.0

3.6

0

1.2



GNP Growth

9.8

5.0

2.3

1.5



1985



Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

June

July

Aug

Sept

Oct

Nov

Dec



Money Supply

9.5

13.6

6.1

7.3

14 2

17.3

10.8

17.3

13.3

5.1

11.5

12.6



Fed Funds rate

8.4

8.5

8.6

8.3

8.0

7.5

7.9

7.9

7.9

8.0

8.1

8.3



Short-term rate

7.8

8.3

8.5

8.0

7.5

7.0

7.1

7.1

7.1

72

72

7.1



Long-term rate

11.6

11.7

12.1

11.7

112

10.6

10.7

10.7

10.8

10.7

102

9.8



Unemployment

7.4

7.3

7.3

7.3

7.3

7.3

7.3

7.1

7.1

7.1

7.0

6.9



Inflation

2.4

3.6

6.0

4.8

2.4

2.4

2.4

2.4

2.4

3.6

72

4.8



GNP Growth

3.1

2.3

4.1

2.1



1986



Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

June

July

Aug

Sept

Oct

Nov

Dec



Money Supply

3.6

6.3

15.8

14.4

21.1

14.4

16.4

18.4

10.7

14.4

18.8

30.5



Fed Funds rate

8.1

7.9

7.5

7.0

6.9

6.9

6.6

62

5.9

5.9

6.0

6.9



Short-term rate

7.1

7.1

6.6

6.1

62

62

5.8

5.5

52

52

5.4

5.5



Long-term rate

9.6

9.1

8.1

7.5

7.8

7.7

7.3

7.3

7.6

7.6

7.4

7.3



Unemployment

6.8

72

72

7.1

72

7.1

7.0

6.8

7.0

6.9

6.9

6.7



Inflation

3.6

-4.8

-4.8

-3.6

2.4

6.0

0

2.4

3.6

2.4

3.6

2.4



GNP Growth

3.8

.6

2.8

1.7





APPENDIX C


The Federal Open Market Committee releases summary minutes of its meetings six to eight weeks later, on the day after the subsequent meeting. The following is the complete text of the report on the FOMC meeting of May 18, 1981, when the committee decided to tighten—a “substantial deceleration” of money growth—two months before the economy went into recession.

Meeting Held on May 18, 1981 Domestic Policy Directive

The information reviewed at this meeting suggested that growth of real gross national product was slowing in the current quarter from the rapid pace in the first quarter, but activity currently appeared stronger than had been projected at the time of the Committee’s meeting on March 31. Real GNP had grown at an annual rate of 6V2 percent in the first quarter, according to preliminary estimates of the Commerce Department, and additional data that became available after release of the preliminary estimates suggested that growth had been even more rapid. Average prices, as measured by the fixed-weight price index for gross domestic business product, have continued to rise rapidly in the current quarter, but somewhat less so than earlier in the year.

The dollar value of total retail sales increased slightly further in March but declined appreciably in April, reflecting mainly a sharp drop in sales of new cars in response to the ending of manufacturers’ price rebates. Unit sales of new automobiles fell from an annual rate of 10.3 million units in March to 8.1 million units in April. The value of sales excluding automobiles and building materials registered sizable gains in both March and April.

The index of industrial production, which had increased 0.5 percent in March, rose 0.4 percent in April. An increase in auto assemblies, to a rate substantially above the recent pace of sales, was a major factor in the April advance, and output of business equipment and space and defense products exhibited considerable strength. A strike cut production of coal in half and limited the rise in the total industrial production index by about 0.3 percentage point.

Nonfarm payroll employment changed little in March and April after adjustment for strikes, and the unemployment rate was stable at 7.3 percent. In April employment continued to expand in service industries but declined considerably in retail trade establishments and in construction. Small employment gains were recorded in the manufacturing sector, and the average factory workweek edged up 0.1 hour to 40.1 hours.

Private housing starts in March remained at the annual rate of about \lA million units recorded in February; during the preceding six months, housing starts had been in a range of 1.4 million to 1.6 million units. Sales of new homes in March continued at the reduced pace of recent months, and sales of existing homes declined further.

Producer prices of finished goods rose at an annual rate of 9Vi percent in April, compared with an average rate of 12 percent during the first quarter. The surge of energy prices that had characterized earlier months of the year abated in April, and prices of consumer foods were unchanged. Prices of crude foodstuffs, however, rose sharply. The rise in the consumer price index slowed in March, reflecting a slowing in price increases of energy items and continued moderate increases in food prices and homeownership costs. Prices of other consumer items continued to rise at a relatively rapid pace. Over the first four months of 1981, the rise in the index of average hourly earnings of private nonfarm production workers was slightly less rapid than the pace recorded during 1980.

In foreign exchange markets the trade-weighted value of the dollar against major foreign currencies had risen by about 8V2 percent since the final days of March to its highest level in 3!/2 years. In March the U.S. trade deficit declined sharply, bringing the first-quarter deficit to a level well below the average in 1980. The value and volume of exports rose substantially from the fourth quarter, and the value of imports increased moderately.

At its meeting on March 31, the Committee had decided that open market operations in the period until this meeting should be directed toward behavior of reserve aggregates consistent with growth in M-1B from March to June at an annual rate of 5V2 percent or somewhat less, after allowance for the impact of flows into NOW accounts, and growth in M-2 at an annual rate of about IOV2 percent. If it appeared during the period before the next regular meeting that fluctuations in the federal funds rate, taken over a period of time, within a range of 13 to 18 percent were likely to be inconsistent with the monetary and related reserve paths, the Manager for Domestic Operations was promptly to notify the Chairman, who would then decide whether the situation called for supplementary instructions from the Committee.

