Acknowledgments





First, I wish to thank all the couples I have had the honor to work with over the last twenty-five years. You have fascinated, enthralled, and educated me. In the drama of separateness and togetherness that is a couple therapy session, I have explored with you the reality of what it means to love, to be heartbroken, and to find a way to deep, nurturing connectedness.

Second, I wish to thank my dear colleagues at the Ottawa Couple and Family Institute and International Center for Excellence in EFT, especially Dr. Alison Lee and Gail Palmer. Without them, the Institute and Center would not exist; with them, I’ve been able to create a professional family.

I would like to thank all my wonderful graduate students at the University of Ottawa, School of Psychology, who have hurled themselves at outcome and change process studies in couple therapy with a passion and commitment that match my own. They have watched thousands of tapes of therapy sessions with me.

I thank my colleagues at the School of Psychology at the University of Ottawa, who have collaborated with and supported me, especially Dr. Valerie Whiffen. Also, the colleagues who teach EFT with me and have taken this way of helping couples all over the world, including Dr. Scott Woolley of Alliant University in San Diego, Dr. Jim Furrow, Dr. Brent Bradley, Dr. Martin North, Doug Tilley, Dr. Veronica Kallos, Yolanda von Hockauf, Dr. Leanne Campbell, Dr. Judy Makinen, and Ting Liu, who translated the key book on EFT into Chinese. A special acknowledgment goes to Dr. Les Greenberg, who formulated the first version of EFT with me at the University of British Columbia.

A special thank-you goes to my colleagues in social psychology, particularly Dr. Phil Shaver, Dr. Mario Mikulincer, and others who have been pioneers in applying attachment theory to adult relationships and who have tolerated a crazy clinician in their midst. Over the past fifteen years, they have produced an explosion of research studies and rich insights — knowledge that I have taken into my couple sessions and used to make a difference in people’s lives. I also thank my dear colleague John Gottman for all the debates and discussions and the wonderful validation and encouragement he has given me over the years.

I would like to thank Tracy Behar, my editor at Little, Brown, for her unflagging enthusiasm and outrageous confidence in me and this project; my agent, Miriam Altshuler, for her total professionalism and expert guidance; and freelance editor Anastasia Toufexis, who waded through rough drafts of the book and saved the reader from having to do the same.

I must thank my three children, Tim, Emma, and Sarah, for tolerating my obsession with this book, and all the friends in Ottawa who believed in me. I have been most fortunate to find exactly what it was that I was meant to do, as a researcher, teacher, writer, and therapist, but my real learning about love and relationships has been done, of course, in my own family. Most of all and always, I must thank my incredible partner, John Palmer Douglas, who is my safe haven, my secure base, my inspiration.





Glossary

amygdala An almond-shaped area in the midbrain associated with rapid emotional responses, especially the processing of fear. It appears to play a crucial role in fight-or-flight responses. When you leap out of the path of a suddenly approaching car, your amygdala has just saved your life.

A.R.E. An acronym for a conversation that positively addresses the question Are you there for me? Attachment theory and research tell us that emotional Accessibility (Can I reach you? Will you pay attention to me?), Responsiveness (Can I rely on you to respond and care about my feelings?), and Engagement (Will you value me, put me first, and stay close?) characterize secure bonding interactions between intimates.

attachment cue Any sign — from an inner-felt sense, a loved one, or a situation — that turns on the attachment system, our attachment-oriented emotions, or our sense that we need others. A sudden sense of doubt that a partner cares, a dismissive comment from a partner, or a threat from a situation makes us focus on how available and responsive our loved ones are.

attachment figure A person we love or are emotionally attached to whom we see as a potential safe haven and source of comfort. Usually a parent, sibling, romantic partner, or lifelong friend. On a spiritual level, God can also be an attachment figure.

attachment injury A sense of betrayal and/or abandonment at a key moment of need that, if not addressed and healed, undermines trust and connection and triggers or fuels relationship distress and partner insecurity.

attachment protest A reaction to perceived separation from an attachment figure. It is often the first response to emotional and physical disconnection. Protest is designed to signal distress to attachment figures and get them to respond. It is characterized by anger and anxiety.

codependent A term applied to a person who facilitates, albeit often unintentionally, the dysfunctional behavior of a loved one. For example, the partner of an alcoholic who wants the drinking to stop but does not insist that this problem be confronted. The implication is that this partner’s dependence on the relationship prevents him or her from confronting the alcoholic.

contact comfort A phrase used by psychological researcher Harry Harlow to describe the response of infant monkeys to physical contact with a “soft” mother, made of squashy cloth. Contact comfort is, in Harlow’s view, essential to help infants soothe themselves in times of stress and anxiety. In his studies, infant monkeys sought contact comfort before food. He concluded that, in primates, contact comfort is a primary need.

conversation In this book, a deliberate attempt to talk with a partner in a way that each learns about the relationship. The seven transforming conversations illuminate how you interact, not only what you talk about.

cortisol A key stress hormone released by the adrenal glands to mobilize the body, particularly the amygdala, to deal with emergencies. Hostile critical reactions from others trigger especially high levels of cortisol. If produced constantly or in excess, the hormone can damage the body, notably the heart and immune system. There is also evidence suggesting that it destroys neurons in the hippocampus section of the brain, impairing memory and learning and facilitating overgeneralization of danger cues. For example, we know that dark streets late at night are potentially dangerous, but under prolonged stress, we may begin thinking that all streets, even early in the evening, hold danger.

Demon Dialogues The three patterns of interaction that form self-perpetuating feedback loops and make secure connection more and more difficult. These patterns are: Find the Bad Guy, or mutual blaming and criticism; the Protest Polka, wherein one person protests lack of safe emotional connection and the other defends and withdraws (the polka is also known as the Demand-Withdraw cycle); and Freeze and Flee, in which both partners withdraw in self-protection.

earned security The concept that our attachment expectations and responses can be revised as we gain experience in relationships. Even if we have a negative history, for example, with a parent, if we have a loving partner we can “earn” a secure feeling in our relationship.

effective dependency A positive state of secure attachment that enables us to tune in to our need for others and successfully ask for support and comfort. This state promotes connection with others and helps us handle stress as well as explore and deal with the world.

emotion From the Latin emovere, to move. Emotion is a physiological process that orients us to important cues in our world and gets us ready to act. It is best understood as a process. It consists of a very rapid perception that something is important, followed by a body response, an effort to understand the meaning of the cue, and a move into action. Emotions, expressed mostly in voice and face, also send rapid signals to others. In this book the word is used interchangeably with the word feelings.

enmeshed Extreme closeness that impedes separate functioning and autonomy. In the past, lack of separateness, rather than lack of secure, positive connection, was considered the core problem in conflictual families and couple relationships. Health was defined as being able to separate from others, to stay objective and in control of emotions, and to not allow loved ones to strongly influence one’s decisions.

handles Descriptive images, words, or phrases that capture and distill your innermost feelings and vulnerabilities. Once we find our handles, we can use them to open the door to and explore our inner world.

mirror neurons Nerve cells that activate in sympathy and in the same brain location as the nerve cells of the person whose actions we are watching. This seems to be the physiological basis of imitation, our ability to participate in another’s actions. These neurons help us sense what others intend and help us connect with what the other feels. We grasp the minds of others; we resonate with their state. Scientists suggest that the more active a person’s mirror neuron system, the stronger his or her empathy will be.

oxytocin The neurotransmitter most associated with bonding between mother and infants and between sexual partners. Dubbed the “cuddle hormone,” oxytocin is synthesized in the hypothalamus region of the brain and is found only in mammals. It plays an important role during nursing (helping to eject milk), labor (helping the uterus to contract), and orgasm. It also seems to promote close contact and affiliative behaviors with attachment figures as well as overall positive social interaction. The higher our levels of oxytocin, the more we want to approach and engage with others. Oxytocin appears to inhibit aggressive and defensive behaviors. It also depresses production of stress hormones like cortisol. Skin on skin, touch, and warmth prime oxytocin manufacture.

primal panic The feeling often induced by separation from a key attachment figure. This panic mobilizes us to call to, reach for, and renew contact with the loved one who provides protection and a sense of safety. Emotion theorist Jaak Panksepp, who coined the term, views primal panic as a specific anxiety system in the brain that is especially honed in mammals. He refers to it as an “ancestral neural code” that sparks our brains to produce stress hormones like cortisol upon separation and the calming hormone oxytocin when we are again in close contact with the loved one.

resonance A term in physics that denotes a sympathetic vibration between two elements that leads them to suddenly synchronize signals and match pace and vibration. This creates a prolonged response. In relationships, we resonate with each other when we are tuned in to each other physiologically. Then emotional states converge. We are on the same wavelength, so that we literally share in the experience of others. It is this resonance that triggers a wave of emotion in a crowd; for example, at weddings when the vows are said and the happy couple marches out together, or at soldiers’ funerals when the bugler sounds a final goodbye.

Strange Situation The renowned and pivotal experiment created by Mary Ainsworth and John Bowlby to study attachment between mothers and toddlers. It involves separating a child from its mother in an unfamiliar environment where the child is likely to feel uncertain or anxious, and coding the child’s emotional response when the mother returns.

symbiosis In psychological theory, a state in which one person is mentally and emotionally fused with another. Originally, for example, it was believed that a baby experienced him- or herself as part of the mother’s body. Growing up was thought to be primarily a process of becoming more and more separate and autonomous. Inability to separate could lead to mental illness. For example, schizophrenia once was seen as the result of being symbiotically fused, usually with one’s mother. The idea is part of the “dependency and closeness are dangerous for your mental health” school of thought. More recent theories question the validity of this concept.

synchrony A state of mutual emotional attunement and responsiveness.

2 Ds A term used to refer to two universal relationship sensitivities or raw spots, namely the sense of being deprived of connection or emotionally starved, and the feeling of being deserted or rejected as unlovable by loved ones. Both result in our feeling alone and vulnerable.

undifferentiated A concept used in family therapy indicating that a person cannot distinguish between feelings and rational thought and is reactive in relationships rather than able to make self-directed choices. The implication is that this person is too dependent on others for his or her sense of self-worth. If a therapist believes that a lack of differentiation is the problem in a distressed relationship, then improvement involves helping the partners to create clear boundaries with each other and focus on making independent decisions.

vasopressin A hormone produced in the brain, closely related to oxytocin, which has similar effects. In research with male prairie voles, vasopressin peaks during arousal and oxytocin peaks during ejaculation. Vasopressin seems to trigger a preference for a particular partner and a tendency to aggressively guard that partner from other suitors. It also appears to trigger more intense parental care.





For more information on EFT or to find a therapist trained in EFT, go to www.eft.ca.





References




General

Blum, Deborah. Love at Goon Park: Harry Harlow and the science of affection. Berkley Books, 2002.

Coontz, Stephanie. Marriage, a History: From obedience to intimacy or how love conquered marriage. Viking Press, 2005.

Ekman, Paul. Emotions Revealed. Henry Holt, 2003.

Goleman, Daniel. Social Intelligence: The new science of human relationships. Bantam Press, 2006.

Gottman, John. The Seven Principles for Making Marriage Work. Crown Publishers, 1999.

Johnson, Susan. The Practice of Emotionally Focused Couple Therapy: Creating connection. Brunner/Routledge, 2004.

Karen, Robert. Becoming Attached. Oxford University Press, 1998.

Lewis, Thomas, Fari Amini, and Richard Lannon. A General Theory of Love. Vintage Books, 2000.

Mikulincer, Mario, and Phil Shaver. Attachment in Adulthood: Structure, dynamics and change. Guilford Press, 2007.

Siegel, Daniel, and Mary Hartzell. Parenting from the Inside Out. Putnam, 2003.




PART ONE: A New Light on Love



Love — A Revolutionary New View

Barich, Rachel, and Denise Bielby. Rethinking marriage: Change and stability in expectations 1967–1994. Journal of Family Issues, 1996, vol. 17, pp. 139–169.

Bowlby, John. Attachment and Loss, Volume 1: Attachment. Basic Books, 1969.

———. Attachment and Loss, Volume 2: Separation. Basic Books, 1973.

———. Attachment and Loss, Volume 3: Loss. Basic Books, 1981.

Buss, David, Todd Shackelford, Lee Kirkpatrick, and Randy Larsen. A half century of mate preferences: The cultural evolution of values. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 2001, vol. 63, pp. 491–503.

Campbell, A., P. E. Converse, and W. L. Rodgers. The Quality of American Life. Russell, Sage Publications, 1976.

Coan, James, Hillary Schaefer, and Richard Davidson. Lending a hand. Psychological Science, 2006, vol. 17, pp. 1–8.

Coyne, James, Michael J. Rohrbaugh, Varda Shoham, John Sonnega, John M. Nicklas, and James Cranford. Prognostic importance of marital quality for survival of congestive heart failure. The American Journal of Cardiology, 2001, vol. 88, pp. 526–529.

Dimsdale, Joel E. Survivors, Victims and Perpetrators: Essays on the Nazi Holocaust. Hemisphere, 1980.

Eisenberger, Naomi I., Matthew D. Lieberman, and Kipling Williams. Why rejection hurts: A common neural alarm system for physical and social pain. Trends in Cognitive Science, 2004, vol. 8, pp. 294–300.

Feeney, Brooke C. The dependency paradox in close relationships: Accepting dependence promotes independence. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 2007, vol. 92, pp. 268–285.

Finegold, Brie. Confiding in no one. Scientific American Mind, 2006, vol. 17, p. 11.

Hawkley, Louise, Christopher M. Masi, Jarett Berry, and John Cacioppo. Loneliness is a unique predictor of age-related differences in systolic blood pressure. Journal of Psychology and Aging, 2006, vol. 21, pp. 152–164.

House, James, Karl R. Landis, and Debra Umberson. Social relationships and health. Science, 1988, vol. 241, pp. 540–545.

Kiecolt-Glaser, Janice K., Timothy J. Loving, J. K. Stowell, William B. Malarkey, Stanley Lemeshow, Stephanie Dickinson, and Ronald Glaser. Hostile marital interactions, pro-inflammatory cytokine production and wound healing. Archives of General Psychiatry, 2005, vol. 62, pp. 1377–1384.

Kiecolt-Glaser, Janice K., William B. Malarkey, Marie-Anne Chee, Tamara Newton, John T. Cacioppo, Hsiao-Yin Mao, and Ronald Glaser. Negative behavior during marital conflict is associated with immunological down-regulation. Psychosomatic Medicine, 1993, vol. 55, pp. 395–409.

Kiecolt-Glaser, Janice K., Tamara Newton, John T. Cacioppo, Robert C. MacCallum, and Ronald Glaser. Marital conflict and endocrine function: Are men really more physiologically affected than women? Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 1996, vol. 64, pp. 324–332.

Levy, David. Primary affect hunger. American Journal of Psychiatry, 1937, vol. 94, pp. 643–652.

Medalie, Jack H., and Uri Goldbourt. Angina pectoris among 10,000 men. American Journal of Medicine, 1976, vol. 60, pp. 910–921.

Mikulincer, Mario. Attachment style and the mental representation of the self. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1995, vol. 69, pp. 1203–1215.

———. Adult attachment style and information processing: Individual differences in curiosity and cognitive closure. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1997, vol. 72, pp. 1217– 1230.

———. Adult attachment style and individual differences in functional versus dysfunctional experiences of anger. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1998, vol. 74, pp. 513–524.

Mikulincer, Mario, Victor Florian, and Aron Weller. Attachment styles, coping strategies, and post-traumatic psychological distress: The impact of the Gulf War in Israel. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1993, vol. 64, pp. 817–826.

Morell, Marie A., and Robin F. Apple. Affect expression, marital satisfaction and stress reactivity among premenopausal women during a conflictual marital discussion. Psychology of Women Quarterly, 1990, vol. 14, pp. 387–402.

O’Leary, K. D., J. L. Christian, and N. R. Mendell. A closer look at the link between marital discord and depressive symptomatology. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 1994, vol. 13, pp. 33–41.

Ortho-Gomer, Kristina, Sarah Wamala, Myriam Horsten, Karen Schenck-Gustafsson, Neil Schneiderman, and Murray Mittleman. Marital stress worsens prognosis in women with coronary heart disease. Journal of the American Medical Association, 2000, vol. 284, pp. 3008–3014.

Putnam, Robert D. Bowling Alone: The collapse and revival of American community. Simon and Schuster, 2000.

Roberts, Brent W., and Richard W. Robins. Broad dispositions: The intersection of personality and major life goals. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 2000, vol. 26, pp. 1284–1296.

Simpson, Jeffry, William Rholes, and Julia Nelligan. Support seeking and support giving within couples in an anxiety provoking situation: The role of attachment styles. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1992, vol. 62, pp. 434–446.

Twenge, Jean. The age of anxiety? Birth cohort change in anxiety and neuroticism. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 2000, vol. 79, pp. 1007–1021.

Uchino, Bert, John Cacioppo, and Janice Kiecolt-Glaser. The relationship between social support and psychological processes. Psychological Bulletin, 1996, vol. 119, pp. 488–531.

Yalom, Marilyn. A History of the Wife. HarperCollins, 2001.



Where Did Our Love Go? Losing Connection

Gottman, John. What Predicts Divorce? Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1994.

Huston, Ted, John Caughlin, Renate Houts, Shanna Smith, and Laura George. The connubial crucible: Newlywed years as predictors of marital delight, distress and divorce. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 2001, vol. 80, pp. 237–252.

LeDoux, Joseph. The Emotional Brain: The mysterious underpinnings of emotional life. Simon and Schuster, 1996.

Panksepp, Jaak. Affective Neuroscience: The foundations of human and animal emotions. Oxford University Press, 1998.




PART TWO: Seven Transforming Conversations



Conversation 2: Finding the Raw Spots

Davila, Joanne, Dorli Burge, and Constance Hammen. Does attachment style change? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1997, vol. 73, pp. 826–838.

LeDoux, Joseph. The Emotional Brain: The mysterious underpinnings of emotional life. Simon and Schuster, 1996.



Conversation 4: Hold Me Tight — Engaging and Connecting

Carter, Sue. Neuroendocrine perspectives on social attachment and love. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 1998, vol. 23, pp. 779–818.

di Pelligrino, Guiseppe, Luciano Faduga, L. Leonardo Fogassi, Vittorio Gallese, and Giacomo Rizzolatti. Understanding motor events: A neurophysiological study. Experimental Brain Research, 1992, vol. 91, pp. 176–180.

Gallese, Vittorio. The shared manifold hypothesis: From mirror neurons to empathy. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 2001, vol. 8, pp. 33–50.

Insel, Thomas. A neurological basis of social attachment. American Journal of Psychiatry, 1997, vol. 154, pp. 725–735.

Johnson, Sue, and Leslie Greenberg. Relating process to outcome in marital therapy. Journal of Marital and Family Therapy, 1988, vol. 14, pp. 175–183.

Kosfeld, Michael, Marcus Heinrichs, Paul Zak, Urs Fischbacher, and Ernst Fehr. Oxytocin increases trust in humans. Nature, 2005, vol. 435, pp. 673–676.

Stern, Daniel. The Present Moment in Psychotherapy and Everyday Life. Norton, 2004.

Uvnas-Moberg, Kerstin. Oxytocin may mediate the benefits of positive social interaction and emotions. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 1998, vol. 23, pp. 819–835.

Varela, Francisco, Jean-Phillippe Lachaux, Eugenio Rodriguez, and Jacques Martinerie. The Brainweb: Phase synchronization and large-scale integration. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 2001, vol. 2, pp. 229–239.



Conversation 5: Forgiving Injuries

Herman, Judith. Trauma and Recovery. Basic Books, 1992.

Simpson, Jeffry, and William Rholes. Stress and secure base relationships in adulthood. In Attachment Processes in Adulthood, Kim Bartholomew and Dan Perlman (editors), Jessica Kingley Publisher, 1994, pp. 181–204.



Conversation 6: Bonding Through Sex and Touch

Davis, Deborah, Phillip Shaver, and Michael Vernon. Attachment style and subjective motivations for sex. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 2004, vol. 30, pp. 1076–1090.

Field, Tiffany. Touch. MIT Press, 2003.

Gillath, Omri, and Dory Schachner. How do sexuality and attachment interrelate? In Dynamics of Romantic Love: Attachment, caregiving and sex, Mario Mikulincer and Gail Goodman (editors), Guilford Press, 2006, pp. 337–355.

Harlow, Harry. Learning to Love. Jason Aronson, 1978.

Hazan, Cindy, D. Zeifman, and K. Middleton. Adult romantic attachment, affection and sex. Paper presented at the International Conference on Personal Relationships, Groningen, Netherlands, 1994.

McCarthy, Barry, and Emily McCarthy. Rekindling Desire. Brunner/Routledge, 2003.

Michael, Robert, John Gagnon, Edward Laumann, and Gina Kolata. Sex in America: A definitive survey. Little, Brown and Company, 1995.

Montagu, Ashley. Touching. Harper and Row, 1978.

Simpson, Jeffry, and S. Gangestad. Individual differences in sociosexuality: Evidence for convergent and discriminant validity. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1991, vol. 60, pp. 870–883.

Stern, Daniel. The Present Moment in Psychotherapy and Everyday Life. Norton, 2004.



Conversation 7: Keeping Your Love Alive

Johnson, Susan, and Leslie Greenberg. The differential effects of experiential and problem solving interventions in resolving marital conflict. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 1985, vol. 53, pp. 175–184.

Main, Mary. Metacognitive knowledge, metacognitive monitoring and singular (coherent) vs. multiple (incoherent) models of attachment. In Attachment Across the Life Cycle, Colin Murray Parkes, Joan Stevenson-Hinde, and Peter Marris (editors), Routledge, 1991, pp. 127–159.

Schor, Juliet. The Overworked American. Basic Books, 1992.




PART THREE: The Power of Hold Me Tight



Healing Traumatic Wounds — The Power of Love

Fraley, Chris, David Fazzari, George Bonanno, and Sharon Dekel. Attachment and psychological adaptation in high exposure survivors of the September 11th attack on the World Trade Center. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 2006, vol. 32, pp. 538–551.

Johnson, Susan. Emotionally Focused Couple Therapy with Trauma Survivors: Strengthening attachment bonds. Guilford Press, 2002.

Matsakis, Aphrodite. Trust After Trauma: A guide to relationships for survivors and those who love them. New Harbinger Press, 1997.

———. In Harm’s Way: Help for the wives of military men, police, EMTs and Firefighters. New Harbinger Press, 2005.

Resnick, Heidi, Dean Kilpatrick, Bonnie Dansky, Benjamin Saunders, and Connie Best. Prevalence of civilian trauma and post-traumatic stress disorder in a representative national sample of women. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 1993, vol. 61, pp. 984–991.

Shay, Jonathan. Odysseus in America: Combat trauma and the trials of homecoming. Scribner, 2002.



Ultimate Connection — Love as the Final Frontier

Cohn, Deborah, Daniel Silver, Carolyn Cowan, Philip Cowan, and Jane Pearson. Working models of childhood attachment and couple relationships. Journal of Family Issues, 1992, vol. 13, pp. 432–449.

Conger, Rand, Ming Cui, Chalandra Bryant, and Glen Elder. Competence in early adult relationships: A developmental perspective on family influences. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 2000, vol. 79, pp. 224–237.

Mason, Bill, and Sally Mendoza. Generic aspects of primate attachments: Parents, offspring and mates. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 1998, vol. 23, pp. 765–778.

Mikulincer, Mario, Phillip Shaver, Omri Gillath, and Rachel Nitzberg. Attachment, caregiving and altruism: Boosting attachment security increases compassion and helping. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 2005, vol. 89, pp. 817–839.

Mortenson, Greg, and David Oliver Relin. Three Cups of Tea. Penguin, 2006.

Simpson, Jeffry, Andrew Collins, SiSi Tran, and Katherine Haydon. Attachment and the experience and expression of emotions in romantic relationships: A developmental perspective. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 2007, vol. 92, pp. 355–367.

Sturge-Apple, Melissa, Patrick Davis, and Mark Cummings. Impact of hostility and withdrawal in interparental conflict on parental emotional unavailability and children’s adjustment difficulties. Child Development, 2006, vol. 77, pp. 1623–1641.





ABOUT THE AUTHOR

DR. SUE JOHNSON is director of the Ottawa (Canada) Couple and Family Institute and International Center for Excellence in Emotionally Focused Therapy as well as professor of clinical psychology at the University of Ottawa and research professor at Alliant University in San Diego, California. She is a Fellow of the American Psychological Association and has received numerous honors for her work, including the Outstanding Contribution to the Field of Couple and Family Therapy award from the American Association for Marriage and Family Therapy and the Research in Family Therapy award from the American Family Therapy Academy. She trains counselors in EFT worldwide and consults to the U.S. and Canadian military and the New York City Fire Department. She lives in Ottawa with her husband, two children, and dog. She adores Gilbert and Sullivan, Monty Python, Argentine tango, and kayaking on Canada’s northern lakes.





